Title : Govt hints at raising wheat purchase target

Description : • Drive to buy 400,000 tonnes of grain kicks off; farmers want wheat procured from across Punjab
• Kissan leader urges govt to ensure official rate of staple, terms proposed subsidy a pittance LAHORE: The Pakistan Agricultural Storage and Services Corporation Limited (Passco) on Saturday began its second phase of wheat procurement from Faisa­labad in line with a decision of the federal government to procure 400,000 tonnes more than the original target of 1.4 million tonnes. As he kick-started the second phase, Food Minister Rana Tanveer hinted at the possibility of further increasing the target to facilitate farmers. Passco had originally aimed to purchase 1.4m tonnes, but after farmers started protesting, the pressure on the federal and provincial governments piled on and the premier decided to increase the target to 1.8m tonnes. As of now, Passco has achieved 98 per cent of the initial target and distribution of gunny bags is already underway to meet the increased target. Farmers, however, are not happy with the government’s decision to procure slightly more wheat than intended. They said Passco — a federal body — operated in 13 out of 97 tehsils in Punjab and the decision to purchase additional wheat from designated areas would have a negligible impact. According to farmers, the tradeable surplus this year is expected to be about 10m tonnes and buying 400,000 tonnes would hardly make any difference. Punjab, on the other hand, is reluctant to procure wheat from growers despite province-wide agitations and the persistent stance of farmers. This has also caused a significant impact on the price of wheat, with the staple being sold at a rate much lower than the official price of Rs3,900 per 40kg. The Pakistan Kissan Ittehad claimed that farmers had lost Rs1,150 billion under the wheat head alone due to the crashing prices which reportedly dipped below Rs3,000 per 40kg. Instead of procurement, the Punjab government said it would compensate farmers with interest-free loans of Rs150bn. Kissan leader Khalid Mahmood Khokar, however, is not impressed, saying the paltry subsidy came at a cost of Rs1,150bn. “Instead of this gimmickry, please ensure an officially declared price, which the provincial government had itself calculated, announced, and promised,” Mr Khalid urged the Punjab government. The crisis Pakistan is going through the most difficult wheat season of its history, exacerbated by policy failure and the import of millions of tonnes of wheat shortly before the bumper harvest. The bumper crop followed a record import of 3.5m tonnes by the private sector allegedly due to the ‘weakness’ of the caretaker regime.  
 
 Against the backdrop of such a huge import, hoarders also released their stock to earn profit. The releases of stock by the hoarders and the import of the commodity flooded the market and even met the “entire domestic requirement”, leaving Passco and the Punjab Food Department with 4m tonnes of unexhausted stock. “The 3.5m tonnes imports were staggered in a way, in the name of sustained supplies, that it overlapped with domestic harvesting season and created havoc for the domestic market,” explained Muhammad Ramzan, a wheat trader from Lahore. At the start of this month, the Punjab government had promised a probe into the wheat scandal against the backdrop of protests by the farmers. On Friday, the farmers resumed their protests from Multan against the provincial government’s decision to not buy wheat from farmers. At the protest, PKI leader Khokhar had said the agitation would continue against the government in every district of the province till the acceptance of their demands. He had said the federal government was procuring the wheat in 16 tehsils of the province, while the Punjab government had not purchased even a single grain so far. “Federal government should also buy wheat from other tehsils of the province,” he had demanded. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright © 2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform 

Title : ADB links support with IMF’s clean chit

Description :   “Given my interactions with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the dialogue decisiveness of the current government, I feel very hopeful that there will be a successor programme from the Fund,” said the Asian Development Bank’s (ADB) Country Director for Pakistan Yong Ye in an exclusive interview on the sidelines of ADB’s 57th Annual Meeting in Tbilisi this week. Tacitly indicating that support from ADB would only be possible with a clean chit from the Fund, Mr Ye expressed cautious optimism for the economy. Highlighting the uncertainties from last year, Mr Ye termed the IMF agreement announced in June as a ‘miracle’. Since then, however, he said, the caretaker government did a good job stabilising the economy under the Fund’s Stand-By Arrangement. More importantly, he added, with the IMF agreement in place, the central bank’s foreign exchange reserves increased from $4.4 billion to over $9bn in the week ending on May 3. “While the country may still be in the ICU, its immediate liquidity crisis has been sorted, and default has been avoided. This has given some confidence to the markets,” he said. Record highs of PSX Commenting on the frequent new highs of the Pakistan Stock Exchange (PSX), Mr Ye observed that previously, when the eurobond payment was due, there had been a lot of hype in the media with speculations about whether the country would be able to repay or default. “Such pieces did not induce courage and the markets started fluctuating, contributing to a fluctuating exchange rate.” Bank’s top official says Pakistan has sorted out immediate liquidity crisis, but still in ICU This time around, in April, when the $1bn eurobond payment was due, it was paid without fanfare, indicating much better market confidence. Other positive indicators, such as a narrowing external account deficit and recovering remittances, have also improved investor confidence. However, fiscal deficit challenges remain. One major reason behind them is the high interest rate and high debt servicing burden. ‘Act on what you know’ “In my first meeting with Finance Minister Muhammad Aurangzeb, he showed his commitment to implementing and acting on reforms,” said Mr Ye. Pakistan does not need more economic prescriptions, he said, agreeing with the finance minister’s recent statements. He said the general perception is that Pakistan knows what it needs to do but never does it. “Act on what you know needs to be done.” He emphasised that the ADB management wants to be with the government in this difficult time. The agency understands the need to ensure that the debt is sustainable rather than an added burden that does not remove the constraints the country is facing. While the economy is recovering, there is still uncertainty moving forward. The removal of this uncertainty depends very much on the government’s commitment and ability to implement economic and structural reforms. A special arrangement Mr Ye emphasised the importance of investment in reviving the economy and the role the Special Investment Facilitation Council (SIFC) could play. “My understanding of SIFC is that it is a special arrangement to attract foreign direct investment from some targeted countries,” he said. From the ADB’s point of view, while the SIFC may be a quick short-term solution, Pakistan still needs to look for long-term systematic solutions to attract foreign direct investment. This would require an overall enabling environment with improved regulations and transparency. Given past unsuccessful incidents such as Reko Diq, SIFC, at least in the short run, can demonstrate the country’s potential and ability for investment, which can then be further broadened for other countries. An important element in attracting FDI is the ability of firms to repatriate profit out of the country. At the moment, investors may believe that while earning money in Pakistan is possible, repatriating profits is challenging. Non-productivity of real estate The country needs to increase its revenue and rationalise expenditures, Mr Ye remarked. As an example, he highlights the real estate sector where a lot of savings are invested. The real estate sector is “just financial addition with no value addition. If the country invests in its natural resources instead, the country will start rolling,” he said. Inflation is on a downward trend, and if this trend continues, the monetary policy rate will come down, Mr Ye opinioned, resulting in a smaller burden of debt servicing and more fiscal room. This will also unlock the investment and borrowing by the private sector, he hoped. Since there is a lot of pent-up investment demand during the period of high interest rates, Pakistan may enter into a boom cycle when the rates start coming down. But for the revival to be sustainable, ‘it all comes back to reforms’,’ he said.  Remaining pledges While ADB was among the institutions that pledged support after the disastrous floods of 2022, almost the entire amount has yet to be disbursed. ADB had pledged about $1.5bn, of which only $108.79 million has been released according to a media report, with a further $340.9m expected this year. In response to why there has been a delay, Mr Ye said that the amount pledged was for reconstruction and that the process cannot be rushed. “The damages have to be assessed along with the ground realities, keeping in mind the new climate risk profile and the possibility that these areas may be flooded again,” he said. Pointing out that water was still standing in some areas till the start of this year, Mr Ye said that the new climate risk profile needs to be assessed before the feasibility study. Some roads need to be redesigned, followed by the procurement process, contract award, and finally, disbursement. The entire process is lengthy. Mr Ye identified several critical areas for Pakistan’s long-term economic growth. These include controlling inflation, reducing the fiscal deficit, and diversifying the export base. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright © 2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform 

Title : KP governor, CM Gandapur exchange threats in acrid spat
Description : PESHAWAR / DERA ISMAIL KHAN: The acrimony between Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Chief Minister Ali Amin Khan Gandapur and Governor Faisal Karim Kundi intensified on Saturday when the two leaders threatened each other with “dire consequences”. A day after the governor’s fiery speech, Chief Minister Gandapur warned Governor Kundi to stay within the limits of his constitutional position and avoid making olitical statements. After appearing in an anti-terrorism court in connection with the murder of former KP law minister Sardar Israrullah Khan Gandapur, the CM who belongs to the PTI said he could use his powers to banish Mr Kundi from Governor House. “This Governor House is not your property. Don’t force me to … turn it into a museum and open it for the public.”  
 
 “I will shift you to a two-room annexe,” said Mr Gandapur. He went on to say that even fuel for the governor’s official vehicles comes from the budget of the provincial government and threatened to stop it if the governor who belongs to PPP didn’t refrain from “political statements, below-the-belt remarks and confrontation”. Gandapur warns Kundi will be banished from official residence for indulging in politics, confrontation “You’re the governor; politics is not your job,” Mr Gandapur warned, calling himself the elected representative who came to power with the voters’ mandate. The CM added that if the governor did not pay heed to his “warning”, he would seek his removal. “[T]he letter which notified you [as governor] will also denotify you.” In a hard-hitting speech on Friday, Governor Kundi had indirectly accused the CM of being involved in the killing of former law minister Mr Israrullah and ANP leader Umar Khattab Sherani.  





 Mr Israrullah was killed in a suicide attack in his hometown of Kulachi near Dera Ismail Khan in October 2013. While government officials blamed the Wazi­ris­tan-based Gandapur group for the bombing, a little-known shadowy group, Ansar­­ul Mujahideen, claimed responsibility. ANP’s Mr Sherani was murdered in December 2021, a day before the province’s local government elections, which he was contesting as a candidate for the post of D.I. Khan mayor. The governor said that if he relinquished his constitutional post, he would prove to be a bigger nemesis for CM Gandapur. Mr Kundi also warned that protecting the Governor House was “his constitutional duty” and whoever tried to occupy it “would be dragged on roads”. This was an apparent reply to Mr Gandapur’s May 9 statement in which he warned against efforts to impose governor’s rule in KP and said PTI activists would occupy the Governor House. ‘Want good ties with CM’ Meanwhile, in conversation with Dawn, Mr Kundi said he hoped for good relations with the chief minister, but whoever talked about occupying the Governor House “will be answered befittingly”. People of KP shouldn’t suffer in the fight between the prime minister, governor and chief minister, he said, advising the provincial government to improve the law and order situation. He recalled the kidnapping of a sessions judge in Tank last month and claimed the chief minister paid extortion money for his release. Expected animosity The acrimonious relationship between the two leaders — both being bitter political rivals hailing from D.I.Khan — was expected since Mr Kundi was nominated for the post by his party’s chairman, Bilawal Bhutto-Zardari. The CM expressed his disapproval of the appointment by not attending  Mr Kundi’s oath-taking ceremony last Saturday. A few days later, on May 8, the governor KP did not sign a summary moved by the provincial government to convene an assembly session, forcing the provincial government to requisition the session through the speaker to present the current fiscal budget, according to sources. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright © 2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform 

Title : Seven security personnel martyred in North Waziristan
Description : NORTH WAZIRISTAN: Seven security personnel were martyred and two others sustained injuries in two militant attacks on security forces at different locations in North Wazir­istan on Saturday, local sources said. They said the first attack took place in the Hassan Khel area of Tehsil Datta Khel when an improvised explosive device went off targeting a bomb disposal unit. Soon after the blast, they added, militants opened fire on the forces. As a result, five security personnel embraced martyrdom while two others sustained injuries. Local sources said that in another incident, militants stormed a security post in the Seeman area of Mir Ali. Two security personnel embraced martyrdom in the attack, they added. They said that the bodies of the security personnel and the injured personnel were airlifted to Com­bined Milit­ary Hospital, Bannu. Security forces cordoned off the areas immediately after the attacks and launched a search operation in the areas. Also, in North Waziristan district, a private girls’ school was blown up by unidentified militants in Tehsil Shewa on the night of May 8, police sources said. They said the militants first tortured the school watchman and later blew up two rooms of the school. Similar attacks took place in May last year when two government schools for girls in Mirali had been blown up. No loss of life was reported in the incidents. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright © 2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform 

Title : Opposition plans fresh campaign to ‘protect’ Constitution
Description : • Six-party coalition to approach courts to hold power shows in Faisalabad, Karachi
• PTI favours ‘healing touch’, blames ‘internal factors’ for country’s woes ISLAMABAD: The Tehreek Tahafuz Aayeen-i-Pakistan, a multi-party coalition of opposition parties launched earlier this year, has decided to launch another nationwide campaign for the “restoration” of the Constitution, with power shows expected in Karachi and Faisalabad. In April this year, the six-party alliance had decided to kick-start a countrywide movement for the rule of law and chose Mahmood Khan Achakzai as its president. It also aimed to protect the Constitution. The decision taken during a meeting chaired by Mr Achakzai seemed to add new vigour to the movement and was prompted by the press conference of the ISPR chief in which the military spokesperson vowed no mercy for the May 9 riots’ instigators. The meeting was attended by PTI leaders Omar Ayub and Asad Qaiser, and Sunni Ittehad Council chief Hamid Raza among others. The participants said the recent presser of the ISPR director general was “unconstitutional” and responded that those who had violated the Constitution should apologise instead of asking the PTI to tender an apology. The alliance spokesperson said that opposition parties would launch a countrywide protest and added that it was unacceptable that the “most popular” party in the country was forced to sit on the opposition benches. He said the opposition would not tolerate the “theft” of their mandate. The alliance has also decided to approach courts for permission to hold public gatherings in Karachi and Faisalabad. ‘Healing touch needed’ Separately, PTI leaders Raoof Hasan and Shoaib Shaheen at a press conference in Islamabad blamed ‘internal factors’ for the “state of war” the country is in. Mr Hasan said he had already given a detailed response to the ISPR DG’s press conference but he felt the need to remind him about the “darkest chapters and black days of the country’s history” instead of May 9, which was marked as a ‘black day’.  
 
 Mr Hasan said even though the role of the military establishment was not “glorious” the “reign of terror” unleashed on the PTI over the past two years was unprecedented. He claimed that the Constitution was trampled to crush the PTI, and establish a “one-man” rule in Pakistan to the country “virtually non-functional”. He also demanded that the Hamoodur Rahman Commission report, Abbottabad Commi­ssion report, and the Army Public School Attack Commission report be made public so that the “real characters and factors” responsible for these tragedies could be unmasked. The PTI leader also demanded a probe into the “killing of three prime ministers of the country”, saying these matters should be fairly investigated to punish the wrongdoers. Speaking on the occasion, Shoaib Shaheen said that if the decisions of the country were to be made by an individual, then it would be the law of the jungle. He said that interference in politics by the army was a breach of the Constitution. He reminded the ISPR DG that PTI was leading the electoral race with the “two-thirds majority but results were unlawfully and unconstitutionally halted to fraudulently convert the PTI candidates’ victory into defeat”. In another development, former NA speaker Asad Qaiser criticised the premature withdrawal of tax exemption from erstwhile Fata and Pata. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright © 2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform 

Title : Formation of NA standing panels still in limbo

Description : • NA Secretariat declares 82 PTI-backed MNAs as SIC members
• Speaker calls parliamentary leaders’ meeting ISLAMABAD: The National Asse­mbly is set to begin its fifth regular session on Monday (tomorrow), with formation of the standing committees still not in sight. Speaker Ayaz Sadiq on Saturday invited the parliamentary leaders and chief whips of the parties for a meeting on Monday to discuss the strategy for the upcoming regular session as well as the next month’s budget session. According to an official announcement, the speaker has invited the party leaders to finalise a calendar for the parliamentary year, besides allocation of time for debates on the presidential address to the joint sitting of parliament and the budget, expected to be presented in the first week of June. The meeting will take place at the speaker’s chamber at 3pm, an hour before the scheduled starting time of the new NA session. Generally, such issues are discussed by the House Business Advisory Committee.  
 
 However, due to lack of understanding and some differences, the government and the opposition have failed to agree on the composition and the chairmanship of the committees, even more than two months after the election of Shehbaz Sharif as the prime minister. Under the rules, the committees are required to be formed within thirty days after the prime minister’s election. Though no official agenda has been issued for the meeting, the official announcement has no mention of the issue of the formation of the committees. The delay in the formation of the committees is not only a violation of the assembly rules, it has also started affecting the legislative business as the speaker had already referred four bills to the committees for consideration after their introduction. The government had to face an embarrassing situation in the NA on April 29 when it passed the Tax Laws (Amendment) Bill in a controversial manner after suspending the rules under which the bills are required to be referred to the standing committees. The opposition members lodged a strong protest when Law Minister Azam Tarar moved the motion seeking suspension of the rules ignoring a demand from the opposition that the passage of the law should be deferred till the formation of the committees. During the previous session which concluded on April 29, the speaker on a number of occasions expressed concern over the delay in the formation of the committees, directing the parliamentary leaders to finalise the process as early as possible.  
 
 PML-N’s Tariq Fazal Chaudhry, who is a part of the process, had informed the house that the government had agreed to give chairmanship of 10 committees to the opposition. Sources in the government later told Dawn that besides the chairmanship of 10 standing committees, the government had also agreed to hand over the Public Accounts Committee to the PTI-SIC as per the parliamentary tradition, though there was no constitutional binding. The speaker had initially refused to allocate seats to the PTI-backed independents as members of the Sunni Ittehad Council (SIC) after the Election Commission rejected the SIC’s plea to allocate them the reserved seats in proportion to their seats won in the Feb 8 elections. All these members were shown as independents on the official website of the assembly. This decision was considered to be a main hurdle in the formation of the committees as the parties are given representation in these committees according to their representation in the assembly. However, the NA Secretariat has recently updated its website and these members have now been declared as the SIC members. A source in the NA Secretariat said these members had been declared as the SIC members, following a fresh communication from the ECP on April 25, providing information to the NA Secretariat about the names of the “independent returned candidates who joined different political parties”. The new ECP list of the MNAs, a copy of which is available with Dawn, shows that presently there are 82 SIC members in the National Assembly. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright © 2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform 

Title : Justice Babar Sattar denounces lawyers’ strike, blocking litigants’ entry to courts
Description : ISLAMABAD: Justice Babar Sattar of the Islamabad High Court (IHC) has strongly reacted against the stopping of lawyers and litigants from entering the courts due to a nationwide strike call issued by the top lawyers’ bodies, terming it as “obstruction of justice”. Sources privy to the development told Dawn that Justice Sattar wrote a letter to the three-judge administrative committee, drawing attention to the issue of preventing lawyers and litigants from entering the courts due to the strike call. The strike call was issued to show solidarity with the legal fraternity after what they called disturbing events of Punjab police “brutality against lawyers” who were peacefully protesting the “unlawful divisions” of the civil courts in Lahore. The Pakistan Bar Council (PBC) and the Supreme Court Bar Association (SCBA) declared Wedn­esday as black day and issued a full-day nationwide strike call for all courts, including the Supreme Court, high courts, and subordinate judiciary. Lawyers’ association denies ‘obstruction to justice’ amid PBC, SCBA strike Due to the strike call, lawyers avoided appearing before the courts, and in some instances, representatives of the legal fraternity canvassed for the boycott of court proceedings. Litigants whose cases were fixed after months were left at the mercy of the judges. IHC judges also dismissed several cases for the absence of lawyers. Sources said that Justice Sattar, in the letter, termed forcibly stopping any lawyer and litigant from appearing before the court as tantamount to creating obstacles in access to justice. They said that the administrative committee has sought a report from the deputy registrar of security on instances in which lawyers’ representatives forcibly restrained litigants and their fellow colleagues. However, a court official said that there was not a single complaint either from lawyers or litigants that their access to justice has been denied due to the lawyers’ strike. IHCBA President Riasat Ali Azad, when contacted, said that lawyers issue strike calls to peacefully agitate against the high-handedness of the state or other groups. He said the absence of a lawyer because of a protest was not an obstacle, as the litigant could appear before the court. Mr Azad pointed out that the court summons are very clear; they categorically state that the litigant can appear in person or through an attorney, adding that the petitioners were not under any obligation to attend the court proceedings. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright © 2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform 

Title : UAE hits out at Netanyahu for saying it may help run Gaza

Description : CAIRO: The United Arab Emirates hit out at Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu on Saturday after the Israeli leader said the Gulf state could be involved in aiding a future government in Gaza after the war. The prominent and influential Gulf state is one of few Arab states with official diplomatic ties to Israel, which it has maintained through Israel’s more than six-month war in Gaza, although relations appear to have become frayed. Foreign Minister Sheikh Abdullah bin Zayed Al Nahyan rebuked Netanyahu in an early morning post on X, saying Abu Dhabi denounced the Israeli leader’s comments.  





 “The UAE stresses that the Israeli prime minister does not have any legal capacity to take this step, and the UAE refuses to be drawn into any plan aimed at providing cover for the Israeli presence in the Gaza Strip,” he said in an Arabic post. Sheikh Abdullah said the UAE would be prepared to support a Pale­stinian government that met the hopes and aspirations of the Palestinian people, which he said included independence. In an interview, Netanyahu said the UAE, Saudi Arabia and other countries could possibly assist a civilian government with Gazans in the enclave after the war. Sources said that Abu Dhabi’s relationship with Netanyahu has fractured over the military campaign, with Emirati officials now rarely speaking with him. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright © 2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform 

Title : Action against illegal fishing, trawling demanded in Balochistan
Description : QUETTA: The Balochistan Assembly adopted a resolution demanding the provincial government to take strict measures to stop illegal fishing and trawling in province’s waters. The resolution also called for initiating action against officials of the fisheries department and other individuals involved in this illegal business. The resolution was moved by Maulana Hidayatur Rehman of Haq Do Tehreek (HDT) during the session on Saturday, which was presided over by Speaker Abdul Khaliq Achakzai. Speaking on the resolution, Mr Rehman said as a fisherman, he was aware of the impact of illegal trawling and fishing in Balochistan waters. Balochistan PA passes resolution for action against fisheries dept officials Fishermen have been deprived of at least 15 different species of fish due to the use of banned nets and other equipment installed in the large trawlers, he added. The HTM leader also mentioned that illegal trawling not only depletes Balochistan’s waters of different kinds of fish but also causes a loss of over Rs70 billion annually. “The federal government institutions are patronising the trawling mafia,” Mr Rehman claimed, adding the authorities have rendered the fisheries department redundant by providing outdated boats and incompetent staff recruited on a political basis. Provincial Minister for Planning and Development, Mir Zahoor Ahmed Buledi, while supporting the resolution, said the provincial government was developing a fisheries policy. Under this policy, trackers would be installed on every boat entering the sea for fishing. He disclosed that the government was also making efforts to amend the fisheries act, which would not only benefit fishermen but also increase the GDP. “The government is giving fisheries the status of an industry, and people affiliated with it will be declared labourers,” Mr Buledi said. Home Minister Ziaullah Lang­ove mentioned that the Baloc­histan chief minister had issued orders to stop illegal  trawling. “Illegal trawling in Balochistan waters will be stopped within one month as the chief minister has assigned this task to me.” PPP MPA Mina Majeed Baloch, Rehmat Saleh Baloch, National Party’s Khair Jan Baloch and JUI-F’s Syed Zafar Agha also supported the resolution. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright © 2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform 

Title : A turbulent 2023

Description : PAKISTAN faced a tumultuous year in 2023 marked by severe economic distress and a sharp erosion of civil liberties. As documented in the HRCP’s annual report, the year was nothing short of a human rights crisis on multiple fronts. Economic hardship was pervasive, with back-breaking inflation — nearly 40pc — and low growth hitting the common citizen the hardest. Protests were widespread, ranging from government employees striking against delayed salaries and pension issues to political demonstrations demanding timely elections. The state responded with indifference and sometimes outright violence, underlining its disregard for the people’s constitutional rights. The political arena was no less strained: the year saw unprecedented violence following the arrest of former prime minister Imran Khan; subsequent PTI-led riots were met with harsh government crackdowns. This included mass arrests and the controversial use of military courts for civilian trials. Political dissent was stifled and freedom of speech curtailed with internet shutdowns and media gags on reporting of certain political leaders. Sadly, the government’s management of the turmoil involved significant overreach, impacting judicial independence and skewing the electoral landscape. The swift passage of laws granting sweeping powers to intelligence agencies and restricting media freedoms points to the government’s alarming propensity to consolidate power at the cost of transparency and accountability.  
 
 Human rights violations were not limited to political suppression. The report highlights severe abuses such as enforced disappearances, alleged extrajudicial killings and custodial torture by state agencies. The societal impact of these policies and actions has been devastating. Moreover, marginalised communities, including women, children, religious minorities, and transgender persons, faced increased violence and discrimination. Notable too was the harsh crackdown on peaceful assemblies like the Baloch Yakjehti Council’s protests. On the international front, despite engaging with global human rights mechanisms, Pakistan’s selective adherence to recommendations concerning enforced disappearances and the use of the death penalty reflected a reluctance to fully align with international human rights standards. Rulers would do well to remember that adhering to those standards will help maintain Pakistan’s desperately needed GSP-Plus status and be a more inviting place for foreign investment.  
 
 As the year proceeds, it is imperative for the state to reconsider its approach to human rights. The government must ensure the independence of the judiciary, respect for democratic processes, and protection for all citizens against the abuse of power. Laws that infringe on freedom of expression and assembly should be reviewed and reformed. Additionally, there should be a concerted effort to address the economic inequalities that underpin much of the social unrest. For a stable and prosperous Pakistan, human rights must be more than an ideal; they must be an integral part of governance and everyday life. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright © 2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform 

Title : Indian elections

Description : THE Islamophobic rhetoric being employed by Narendra Modi for this election campaign has become shrill. Pakistan has nearly always been an electoral issue in India. However, this time, it is Indian Muslims who are bearing the brunt of the Indian prime minister’s hate speech. Speaking in Rajasthan last month, he called Muslims “infiltrators” and said they produce too many children. In Gujarat, where, as chief minister, he had overseen the massacre of Muslims in 2002, he accused the Congress of seeking to “loot” India’s wealth and redistribute it among Muslims, and of organising a ‘vote jihad’ against his leadership. Later, he accused the Congress and Muslims of stealing Hindu wealth and property.  
 
 Modi’s inflammatory rhetoric was followed by the BJP’s campaign video portraying Muslims as outsiders who plundered India’s wealth. As concerns grew about communal violence, the video was removed. These allegations are a sequel to Modi’s public referencing of earlier conspiracy theories of ‘love jihad’ (Muslims forcibly converting Hindu women and marrying them to increase the Muslim population) or ‘land jihad’ (capturing land to construct religious structures and gaining control of India’s territory). Concerns that his rhetoric might incite further violence against Indian Muslims are increasing. Ordinarily, since Hindus are in a majority in India, it may be difficult to question the rationale of creating a Hindu state. However, two observations are in order. One, the expansionist designs of the cherished Hindu state seek the creation of an Akhand Bharat, a Hindu right fantasy, which would violate the territorial integrity of Nepal, Bangladesh, Pakistan, and Afghanistan, as per a map displayed in the new parliament building. This is not acceptable to the aforementioned independent states. Two, though the creation of a Hindu state should not translate into discrimination against minorities, regrettably this will be the case. The works of French political scientist Christophe Jaffrelot illustrate how Muslims, 14.5 per cent of India’s population, are grossly underrepresented in bureaucracy, the judiciary, police, and legislative organs. They are second-class citizens.  
 
 The Muslim-majority area of Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmiri is also being subjected to demographic engineering. The destruction of the centuries-old Babri Masjid by Hindu zealots in 1992 and the construction of a temple in its place has set a precedent that might be followed for other historic mosques. This contrasts sharply with the UAE’s gesture of permitting a Hindu temple in Abu Dhabi. Modi’s anti-Muslim rhetoric is raising concerns of violence. Analysts are also pointing out the fascist tendencies of the BJP regime, a steep decline in democratic values, and a departure from the moorings of pluralism and secularism on which modern India was founded. In her book The Incarcerations, Alpa Shah contends that Modi’s India is using its national security apparatus to incarcerate ordinary citizens for their dissenting views. Commenting on the book, Arundhati Roy stated that this was about criminalisation and incarceration of dissent itself. Strikingly, the Modi regime has also used art and culture to project the Hindutva philosophy. Kunal Purohit’s book H-Pop: The Secretive World of Hindutva Pop Stars shows how Hindutva pop stars and influencers are being used to spread the message of Hindu supremacy and create acceptance of Hindutva’s core beliefs. Apart from this, Modi is playing on his government’s accomplishments: making India the world’s fifth largest economy; the construction of 50,000 kilometres of national highways; boosting India’s mi­­litary spending; bu­­ilding Vikrant, In­­dia’s first domes­ti­­cal­­ly built aircraft carrier; and the Chandrayaan-3 moon landing. His prospects of winning a third term have been bolstered by a weak opposition. Despite the formation of the Congress-led 37-party INDIA coalition, there is no real challenge. What has bolstered his outreach is India’s enhanced global standing. In his book Why Bharat Matters, S. Jaishankar presents India as a leader of the global south and makes a case for the rejuvenation of India as a civilisational state.  
 
 There are some lessons that Pakistan could learn from India’s electoral process. One, despite the large scale of India’s elections (969 million registered voters; 1m polling stations) and the use of electronic voting machines, election results are largely accepted without much ado. Two, there is no caretaker government, as the incumbents become ‘caretakers’ in a way, and refrain from announcing major policy decisions or sanctioning expenditure for development schemes. If Modi wins a third term, he is likely to maintain his pro-Hindutva, anti-Muslim, and hegemonic attitude towards regional countries, particularly Pakistan. The write is a former foreign secretary and chairman of Sanober Institute Islamabad. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright © 2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform 

Title : Who can rock the hybrid boat?

Description : A NUMBER of developments over the past week suggest that the establishment is keen to enforce/ maintain the status quo and the only impediment in its path may be an assertive superior judiciary that has been increasingly finding its feet in recent weeks. If jailed PTI leader and former prime minister Imran Khan’s article in UK’s conservative right-wing Telegraph newspaper blaming the military leadership directly for all his woes the week before was not hint enough of the state of play, two public statements by the latter clarified issues rather unambiguously. The first came in the DG ISPR’s press briefing, which was ostensibly called to discuss Afghanistan-based terrorist groups’ involvement in attacks on Chinese nationals working on development projects in the country. But in response to a couple of questions about the PTI and Imran Khan related to the events of May 9 last year, the DG ISPR stated unequivocally that the only path to rehabilitation for the political party and its leaders was to ‘seek forgiveness for attacking your own forces’.  
 
 Then, perhaps, talks could happen and that too with ‘political parties’ (ie, the government), as the military had ‘nothing to do with politics’. Imran Khan has been consistent in saying he wouldn’t talk to the ‘powerless political parties’ and that a meaningful dialogue is possible only with the military. The DG ISPR also lamented the delay in the prosecution and sentencing of all those responsible for the May mayhem — including the ‘leaders and mastermind’ against whom ‘irrefutable evidence’ has been gathered and submitted — and, in doing so, appeared to hint at the establishment’s frustrations with what it perceives as roadblocks being erected by the judiciary. The content of the live presser evoked an equally adamant response from the PTI, which went on the offensive, reiterating its stance that May 9 was a ‘false flag operation’, accusing the military’s spokesman of being economical with the truth, and saying it would be happy to live with the findings of an impartial judicial commission into the May 9 events and would even apologise if found to be at fault. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. The military spokesman had pre-empted this demand in his briefing earlier by saying if a probe were to happen, as was being demanded, it ought to start with 2014, and not nine years later. The 2014 PTI sit-in in the federal capital was said to have been instigated and backed by the then ISI chief. This was the first indication that the military was prepared to hold its own accountable for past follies, if it paved the way for the trials and sentencing of PTI leaders it says were responsible for the attacks on defence installations in a number of cities in Punjab and KP. While the spokesman left nothing to the imagination, on the first anniversary of May 9, the army chief added his voice to his chief spokesman’s in terms of stressing the need for punishing the perpetrators of the violence a year earlier, also lashing out against what he called ‘digital terrorism’.  
 
 This indicates that harsher curbs on social media are planned. So far, the PTI has had overwhelming social media dominance and had been able to keep a step ahead of its adversaries, but we will find out soon whether it has what it takes to bypass software the Chinese have developed over the years (and Pakistan has reportedly acquired) and successfully used to block dissident content. With this ever-widening gulf between the establishment and the party it once saw as a panacea for all that ails Pakistan, the one thing that many felt could force a rethink in the establishment would have been a public manifestation of the immense support enjoyed by the PTI, as evidenced in last February’s elections. Many Pakistan watchers keenly waited all day for multitudes of PTI supporters to spill out onto the roads and streets of major urban conurbations on the party leader’s call to ‘break the shackles’ and protest on May 9. But the brutal crackdown of the past one year seems to have knocked the wind out of the party’s sails and worn down the workers’ will. People may turn out to vote for it in droves, but did not appear prepared to risk life, limb and liberty in coming out for mass protests. Some small localised protests did happen, but had zero impact in the sense of influencing decision-making in the corridors of power. Going forward, a couple of factors will play a role in steering developments. The first and foremost will be the confidence the army chief has in his control over his institution. His predecessor appointed a dozen major generals to three stars in his final six weeks in office and left the incumbent little room in terms of forming his own team. Natural attrition and the more dramatic exit of a couple of three stars on disciplinary grounds recently has, 18 months down the line, given the chief an opportunity to place senior officers of his own choosing in key roles which will give him greater freedom of action both inside and outside the institution. The promotion of three officers this week, including the DG ISPR, to three stars was another step in that direction. The military saw May 9 as a coup against the chief, a failed attempt to dislodge him from office. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. With the PTI protests failing to gather momentum, the only impediment in his path seems to be an increasingly assertive superior judiciary. It can and will, in all likelihood, challenge the establishment’s pre-eminence in decision-making. It isn’t clear how the latter plans to deal with that, especially because it believes that a direly needed economic revival is only possible under the umbrella of a hybrid set-up and in a relatively calm political environment. Only the judiciary can rock its boat now. The writer is a former editor of Dawn. abbas.nasir@hotmail.com Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright © 2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform 

Title : SMOKERS’ CORNER: KHAN AND THE GENERALS

Description : In May 2023, a recorded phone call — allegedly between the mother-in-law of the former Chief Justice of Pakistan (CJP) Umar Atta Bandial, and the wife of a lawyer-member of Imran Khan’s populist Pakistan Tehreek-i-Insaf (PTI) — was ‘leaked’ on social media. In the call, the two ladies can be heard criticising the coalition government made up of the parties that had ousted Khan’s regime in April 2022 through an act of parliament.  At one point in the leaked conversation, the mother-in-law laments, “Yeh kambakht martial law bhi tau nahin lagaatay! [These cursed people don’t even impose martial law!]” By ‘kambakht’, she meant the military establishment (ME).  The conversation was surreal on many levels. Khan had been the ‘blue-eyed boy’ of the ME, until he had a falling out with his ‘makers’. From 2011 till he was elected as prime minister in 2018, the ME had successfully shaped Khan’s political rise in a highly coordinated manner. His ‘popularity’ was first established within the rank and file of the military. Then, some TV journalists were brought on board, followed by the induction of some vital members of the judiciary.   
 
 This troika — the ME, the electronic media and the judiciary — was complimented by the trained social media wing of Khan’s PTI to proliferate narratives pitched against the two older mainstream parties, the Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) and the Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP). The two were deeply demonised as being ‘corrupt’.  After his ouster, Imran Khan was convinced that the establishment had ‘betrayed’ him, and the May 9-10 protests last year were an attempt to rally support amongst ‘pro-Khan’ factions in the military. However, any military intervention was drastically overestimated by his supporters A constituency that had initially been built by the former military dictator Gen Pervez Musharraf, and which mostly consisted of middle-class and upper-middle-class Pakistanis, was navigated by the ME and the media in such a manner that it eventually fell in Khan’s lap. This became a quadrilateral elite, comprising the ME, the media, the judiciary and the middle classes.  After Khan’s ouster in April 2022, he began to publicly lambast the ME, accusing it of ‘betraying’ him. But the truth is, due to the many abject failures of Khan’s government, the ME had begun to gradually distance itself from him months before he was ousted.  In February 2022, Bandial became the CJP. He was cut from the same cloth that at least four of his predecessors were. These included Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry and, even more so, Justice Saqib Nasir, Justice Asif Khosa and Justice Gulzar Ahmad. Anti-PTI parties often accused them of being overtly pro-Khan. Justice Bandial was accused of having a ‘soft corner’ for Khan. Truth is, Bandial wasn’t very good at hiding this soft corner.  Now the question is, during the time of the aforementioned phone call leak, when Khan was holding angry rallies and condemning the ME, why was Bandial’s mother-in-law yearning for a military takeover? Equally surreal was the presence of banners in some pro-Khan rallies with “We Want Martial Law” written on them.  Also, why did the PTI — by planning last year’s violent riots on May 9 and 10, in which PTI supporters and members attacked military property — believe that this would cause a split in the armed forces and bring ‘pro-Khan’ generals to power? Many academics who study coups are of the view that, if the conditions allow, street protests can be followed by a coup d’etat. According to the political scientist Scott A Tyson, protests are often a ‘signal’ to the elites to intervene.  

 The elites in this context are the military and political elites. These may also include the higher judiciary and business elites. A regime facing the protests, too, is made up of political elites. Once the anti-regime elites decide that the protests are clearly signalling for an intervention, this is then communicated to the state elites. The media too plays a role in this. Its reporting of the protests may strengthen the signal and galvanise the military to intervene.  The mother-in-law’s ‘kambakht’ lament was expressing a desperate yearning within sections of economic elites for military intervention. This nature of signalling was loud and clear on numerous WhatsApp groups when Khan was holding rallies against his ouster. The signal became even more obvious when the “We Want Martial Law” banners began to appear at the rallies. Some media personnel also started enhancing the signal to the ME.  But by late 2022, the ME’s top leadership had changed. A general who had earlier exited the project that was set up to facilitate Khan’s rise became the new army chief. Yet, PTI believed that many remnants of the project were still active within the military.  I believe that with the judiciary still in facilitation mode, the notion of causing a split within the military to replace the new military chief with ‘pro-Khan’ generals was the brainwave of some retired military men who were well-versed in the theories of post-protest coups.  Once the signal to intervene in Khan’s post-ouster rallies was ignored by the new ME, a violent uprising was conceived that was to target the new ME. The ‘uprising’ was enacted to evoke the ‘concerns’ of the supposed pro-Khan generals. The signal now was: eject the new army chief and intervene (on the side of Khan) to avoid an all-out civil war. This ‘plan’ could not have been formulated without the input of some retired officers. Many of them had been quite vocal in their support for Khan.   
 
 The violent May 9 and 10 protests were orchestrated by a political elite (PTI) against another set of elites (the coalition government) to signal the need for an intervention to judicial and military elites. But, according to Tyson, whether or not a coup will succeed is generally not certain to elites. This uncertainty is caused by the uncertainty regarding the actions of other elites. The ‘other elite’, in the context of the May 9 and 10 riots, was the military. An intervention by ‘pro-Khan’ officers was drastically overestimated by the planners and the plan collapsed. The coalition government was able to withstand the assault. The new military chief began to swiftly oust the remaining ‘pro-Khan’ elements from the military — even though those remaining in the judiciary are now trying to avoid suffering a similar fate through a pushback in the name of the ‘independence of the judiciary.’ This, too, is quite surreal. Published in Dawn, EOS, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright © 2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform 

Title : Situationer: Riverine region in the crosshairs of militia violence

Description : DESPITE a year-long anti-dacoit operation in upper Sindh’s riverine area, the dacoit factor remains an enigma for the provincial police. The situation took a new turn on May 5 when the Bugtis, allegedly backed by the Punjab police and equipped with military-grade weapons, infiltrated the riverine area of Rwanti in Ghotki, which lies on the Sindh-Punjab border, adding a new layer of complexity to the ongoing operation. The recent incident has once again laid bare the seeming helplessness of the Sindh police, sparking outrage among the province’s intelligentsia. The scourge of dacoits has long plagued parts of northern Sindh, with the government’s efforts to eradicate them yielding little success. Despite continued endeavours to tackle the issue, the desired results remain elusive. The Kalpar Bugtis, led by their chief Jalal Kalpar Bugti, claimed to have exacted revenge for the murder of his 30-year-old son, Abdul Rehman Kalpar, by killing two prominent dacoits from the Shar community and injuring half a dozen others. The incident occurred in the Machhko police station area, which falls under the jurisdiction of the Punjab police. The dacoits killed were identified as Alim alias Almo Shar, brother of Sanu Shar, and Hakim alias Haku Shar. Rehman Kalpar was ambushed and killed by dacoits on Feb 13 while he was travelling on the CPEC road in Ghotki district. Jalal Kalpar reached out to the Sindh police, seeking their assistance in avenging his son’s murder, according to a senior police officer familiar with the situation. Dacoit issue remains an enigma for Sindh police Jalal Kalpar is unapologetic and straightforward in justifying his actions. “I repeatedly reached out to the Ghotki police, but they ignored me. I went to perform Umrah, and upon my return, I was approached by the Punjab police to liaise with them and see how things work,” he told Dawn over phone from Sui in Balochistan.  
 
 Jalal alleged that Ghotki police SSP Anwar Khetran made excu­ses, claiming that his force was outgunned by the dacoits, as they only had G-3 and Kalashnikov rifles. However, he added, Mr Khetran did acknowledge that geo-fencing evidence had confirmed the involvement of the Shar community in his son’s murder. “Punjab police sought help from me in terms of human resource and police would lead the offensive. My men were there as a cover. Finally, Shars were killed in Machko police limits of Punjab. Sindh police didn’t do anything in this offence,” Jalal alleged. Jalal Kalpar hails from those Bugti families who defied the late Nawab Akbar Bugti and were subsequently displaced from Dera Bugti, settling in Sindh. Following Rehman’s killing, Jalal declared at a jirga in Sui that he would hold accountable those responsible, specifically targeting Shaharyar Shar, the chieftain of the Shar clan and a former PTI leader who later joined PPP. In an attempt to defuse the situation, Shar reached out to Jalal to clarify his position and maintain neutrality. “Jalal conveyed message to Shaharyar that if Abid Hussain Jatoi, Abid Sundrani, or Gul Mohammad Jakhrani stand surety for him, only then will he talk to him. Only Gul Mohammad agreed, and he, along with Shaharyar, met Kalpar at his Sukkur residence, but names of Rahib Khan Shar and Sana Shar emerged as those responsible for Rehman’s murder,” a police officer said. Police post as Bugtis’ base A former SSP of Ghotki said that before the May 5 incident, Bugtis had started arriving in areas along the Sindh-Punjab border. “They [Bugtis] wanted Bhaya-4 police post vacated by Sindh police. This post is manned by Ghotki police, but the area falls in Punjab’s territorial limits. As they wanted to use this post as their operational base, but didn’t find Ghotki police forthcoming in their response, so they turned to Punjab police eventually,” said the officer. According to him, the Punjab police permitted the Bugtis to utilise the Camp-2 location, which was situated approximately 800 metres from Sanu Shar’s hideout. “It’s an ideal location from which they can confront the Shars comfortably,” the officer added. Viral video images revealed that the Bugtis, armed with prohibited and military-grade weapons, disembarked from APCs in the katcha area. The ensuing gun battle, which lasted a couple of days, resulted in the deaths of two Shars and injuries to several others. The Bugtis then departed. According to a former SSP of Shikarpur, the military-grade weapons used were of 82mm dimension, a type commonly seen in Afghanistan. Dangerous precedent Professor Inam Shaikh, an analyst, says, “The incident has set a dangerous precedent.” He urges the Supreme Court to take suo motu notice. “How can state collaborate with private persons? It amounts to creating private militia which otherwise means civil war. Supreme Court must step in to take action against police authorities and criminals for this illegal act,” he insists. Naseer Memon, a writer, has analysed the situation from the perspective of ‘good dacoits, bad dacoits’ and the economy of the katcha area. “The recent episode of allowing one tribe to attack another in the katcha area can snowball this crime into a tribal warfare. This can flare up a bloodbath,” he says. He believes that a multi-stakeholder economy, operating behind the scenes, drives the dacoits, kidnapping, and ransom industry in upper Sindh. A police official reveals that Rahib Shar has been primarily responsible for the kidnapping of people on the CPEC road and other areas. Meanwhile, Sanu Shar has been running a ‘honey trap’ industry in the riverine area. According to another police officer, Rahib Shar is residing in Sindh’s riverine area, while Sanu Shar is based in Punjab’s limits. “Actually, there is a strip of riverine land stretching over around 3-4km that falls in Sindh but administratively looked after by Rahim Yar Khan administration. Since Punjab police don’t pay heed to this area much and Sindh police also remain inactive, it has become a sort of ‘no man’s land’ and a safe haven for outlaws,“ claims an SSP from lower Sindh. “Bugtis aim to target Shars as a community, while the actual culprits, Rahib Shar and Sanu Shar, remain out of their reach.” After the July 28, 2023, killing of notorious dacoits Janu Indher, Soomar Shar, Shahzado Dashti, Nazar Mohammad alias Nazroo alias Kato Shar, and Mubashir alias Mushir Indhar, the Sindh police chief was initially reluctant to take a position. However, the Sindh police later claimed credit for the operation. Meanwhile, the Punjab police also staked their claim. Nevertheless, the Sindh police asserted their right to the head money of Rs8.5 million fixed by the government against Janu, Soomar, and Shahzado. After the Bugti’s onslaught on the Shars, Sanu Shar uploaded a video clarifying that he was not involved in Rehman’s murder. However, this failed to appease Jalal Kalpar, who has temporarily withdrawn from the area but remains resolute in his vow to take on the Shars until Rehman’s murderers are killed. “I have no issues with Sindh or the Sindhi people, nor did I have any enmity with the Shars as a community. It is the Ganderi Shars, specifically Sannu, Moriyo, Jamal, and Rahib, who are responsible for my son’s murder. So, my quest for vengeance is far from over,” he declared. Despite repeated messages and calls, Ghotki SSP Sumair Noor Channa remained unavailable to explain whether criminal cases have been lodged in this regard. Similarly, Rahim Yar Khan SSP Rizwan Gondal did not reply to questions about how Punjab police are backing private militias to take on outlaws. A message was also sent to Sindh IG Ghulam Nabi Memon to get his side of the story, but no contact could be established with him. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright © 2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform 

Title : Insurgency and social change

Description : THE recent killing of seven barbershop workers from Punjab in Gwadar is another indicator that the insurgency in Balochistan is evolving and intensifying demographic changes, which will impact the sociopolitical landscape of the province. Although targeted killings of settlers in Balochistan are not a new trend, the emergence of the Balochistan Liberation Army as the primary insurgent group has significantly increased operational capacities and diversified targets.  
 
 While the BLA has not officially claimed responsibility for the Gwadar attack, it is likely the act of one of its wings or affiliate groups. Last month, the group carried out a significant attack, killing nine people from central Punjab who were planning on reaching Europe through Iran. Based on their ethnicity, BLA gunmen abducted them from a bus bound for Taftan and later dumped their bodies under a bridge in a hilly area of Noshki. In a similar attack, possibly by the same gunmen, two people were killed when they tried to escape the assailants’ cordon on N-40, the Quetta-Noshki highway. Following the Noshki attack, the BLA issued a statement claiming that its special squad had killed ‘agents’ of Pakistan’s intelligence agencies who, they claimed, were travelling in plain clothes on the bus. However, media reports and investigations later revealed that the victims were using the Balochistan route to travel to Iran and onward to Europe. Baloch militants view workers and travellers from Punjab as collaborators or agents of security forces or the federal government. Attacks targeting Punjabi workers and settlers have occurred in various parts of the province in the past. It appears that the insurgents kill settlers because they are non-combatants and, as such, easy targets. Militant groups assign such tasks to their new recruits to test their conviction and draw them into the cycle of violence. While one can comprehend Baloch grievances against the state institutions and Punjab, it is also crucial to understand why they target non-combatants who have been serving them for years. Whenever anger flares against the state’s flawed policies, settlers become the targets. Traditionally, Baloch society has a few key professions. Hairdressing is one of the major ones they miss. Teaching comes next, with teachers from Punjab and the Urdu-speaking community making significant contributions to the education sector in the province. Like tribal codes in other parts of the country, the Baloch follow the tradition of hosting members of different ethnicities without integrating them into their tribal ethics. This is a common practice, as assimilation is a long process. The same applies to settlers from Punjab and urban Sindh, who have embraced the norms of Baloch society, while maintaining ties with their native towns and communities.  
 
 However, Punjabis constitute the largest ethnic group in the country and wield significant power and resources, leading to resentment not only among the Baloch, but also Pakhtuns and Sindhis. Whenever anger flares against the establishment and the state’s flawed policies, settlers become the targets of this animosity. Historically, barbers have been the first victims when such hatred triggers violence. It is worth noting that many of these barbers hail from southern Punjab, much of which identifies itself as Baloch, but their official domicile determines their identity and ethnicity. Over the last two decades, Pakhtuns have captured market businesses in urban Balochistan, while Sindhis have gradually become prominent in the labour market. Despite issues of ethnic and tribal pride and sociocultural differences, there has been no hostility towards these communities. This is because both ethnicities are part of Balochistan and share some cultural commonalities. Moreover, both communities have faced major hostility, apart from minor issues related to ethnic and tribal pride and sociocultural differences. The reasons are that both ethnicities are part of Balochistan and share few other cultural commonalities, but both are also seen as deprived communities and, in the past, have remained part of the political struggle for rights. Insurgencies have no room for neutrality or ambiguity, as insurgents seek clear distinctions between friends and foes. In places like Myanmar and India, ethnic insurgents target civilians from minority ethnic groups, as well as engage in property destruction and other abuses. While small ethnic groups may strive to maintain a neutral stance, they often find themselves between insurgents and counterinsurgents in grey areas. This dynamic is evident among Pakhtuns and Sindhis, who have been targeted by insurgents while working on government projects. The contractors had hired them as an alternative to Punjabi labour, but they were not spared despite a sense of affinity with them.  
 
 Sociopolitical transformation is a complex phenomenon, which is influenced not only by insurgents but also by internal societal changes. Baloch society is transforming due to rural-to-urban migration, increasing literacy rates, and improved connectivity. Similar to Karachi’s experience, urbanisation in Quetta is making other major urban centres multi-ethnic too. Despite ethnic bonds with Sindhis, coexistence with Pakhtuns and Sindhis may face occasional challenges. Additionally, religion presents a growing challenge, as religious fervour increases alongside literacy rates among the Baloch. While this may appear advantageous for state institutions seeking cohesion through religion, religiosity has not weakened Balochistan’s nationalistic sentiments. The promotion of religious organisations and madressahs by state institutions has failed to make a significant impact, mainly due to the vast disparities within Baloch society’s tribal, rural, and urban composition, which foster diverse political interests. The very forces undermining peace are now major power players. At the national level, the province’s poor human development and governance indicators leave ample space for resistance politics. Sociopolitical changes often trigger paradoxical sentiments, with simultaneous pro-development and anti-development attitudes emerging. When the sense of deprivation intensifies, and resource distribution becomes contentious, it creates a conducive environment for militants to recruit, expand, and diversify their targets and tactics. Targeting non-combatants of the majority group reflects a deepening societal anger at this level. This is the most crucial level, as the state has to rethink and correct its approach towards Balochistan. The writer is a security analyst. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright © 2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform 

