Title : No such thing as strategic state-owned enterprises, says Finance Minister Aurangzeb
Description : Finance Minister Muhammad Aurangzeb on Sunday said that there was no such thing as strategic state-owned enterprises (SOEs) as he stressed the need for privatisation. He made the remarks at a pre-budget conference in Lahore, two days after  Deputy Prime Minister Ishaq Dar said the government would limit its business only to strategic and essential SOEs under its domain but their number would be reduced from 40 after scrutiny. Chairing the Cabinet Committee on Privatisation (CCoP) meeting, which was attended by the finance minister, Dar said privatisation of loss-making SOEs would be a priority. The meeting noted that 40 SOEs were currently categorised as strategic or essential, but respective ministries would submit their details to the Cabinet Committee on State-Owned Enterprises (CCoSOE). The CCoSOE will determine the status of the SOEs to be categorised as strategic or essential entities. Speaking on Sunday, Aurangzeb said: There is no such as [a] strategic SOE. Talking about the meeting chaired by Dar on Friday, he continued, We are absolutely on the same wavelength  that there is no such thing as a strategic SOE. The finance minister said that a meeting would be held tomorrow where we will go back to various ministries and say that all this should be handed over to the private sector. There will be public-private partnership and we will accelerate the privatisation agenda, he said. Commenting on concerns regarding the privatisation of Pakistan International Airlines (PIA), Aurangzeb said the government was not just looking at foreign investors. They are local and foreign investors who are bidding [] there is no such thing that we are only looking at foreign investors, he said. Commenting on a fresh loan programme with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) programme, he said that a larger and longer programme was needed to bring permanence in macroeconomic stability and structural reforms. He also talked about energy reforms, saying that there were leakages and stressed the need for stopping theft. He said that changes were being brought to the boards of distribution companies (Discos) in order to bring in those from the private sector for better corporate governance. And then you will see how we bring those Discos towards concessions or privatisation or a combination of both, he emphasised. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : IMF mission to meet Pakistani authorities next week to discuss next phase of engagement: official
Description : An International Monetary Fund (IMF) mission will meet Pakistani authorities next week to discuss the next phase of engagement, an official from the international money lender said on Sunday. Speaking to Dawn.com, Esther Perez Ruiz, the Funds resident representative for Pakistan, said: A mission team led by Nathan Porter, IMFs mission chief to Pakistan, will meet with authorities next week to discuss the next phase of engagement. The aim is to lay the foundation for better governance and stronger, more inclusive, and resilient economic growth that will benefit all Pakistanis, she added. Pakistan last month completed a short-term $3 billion programme, which helped stave off sovereign default, but the government has stressed the need for a fresh, longer-term programme. Last week, the Fund said that a mission was expected to visit Pakistan this month to discuss the FY25 budget, policies, and reforms under a potential new programme for the welfare of all Pakistanis. Pakistan narrowly averted default last summer, and the $350bn economy has stabilised after the completion of the last IMF programme, with inflation coming down to around 17 per cent in April from a record high 38pc last May. The country is still dealing with a high fiscal shortfall and while the external account deficit has been controlled through import control mechanisms, it has come at the expense of stagnating growth, which is expected to be around 2pc this year compared to negative growth last year. Pakistan is expected to seek at least $6bn and request additional financing from the Fund under the Resilience and Sustainability Trust. On Friday, the Fund said that downside risks for the economy remain exceptionally high. Downside risks remain exceptionally high. While the new government has indicated its intention to continue the SBAs (standby arrangement) policies, political uncertainty remains significant, said the IMF in its staff report following the second and final review under the standby agreement. The Fund added that political complexities and high cost of living could weigh on policy, adding that policy slippages, together with lower external financing, could undermine the narrow path to debt sustainability and place pressure on the exchange rate. The IMF also said higher commodity prices and disruptions to shipping, or tighter global financial conditions, would also adversely affect external stability for the cash-strapped nation. The fund stressed the need for timely post-programme external financing disbursements. Additional input from Reuters Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Situation in AJK calms down after 2 days of violent clashes
Description : Following violent clashes over the last 48 hours, which left a policeman dead, the situation in Muzaffarabad seemed to have calmed down on Sunday, with a Rangers detachment that was sent to Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK) from Kohala having been withdrawn. AJK witnessed violent clashes between the police and activists of a rights movement amid a wheel-jam and shutter-down strike across the territory on Friday and Saturday, which left at least one police official dead and more than 90 others injured, officials told Dawn.com on Saturday. Mirpur Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP) Kamran Ali had said that Sub-inspector Adnan Qureshi succumbed to a gunshot wound in the chest in the town of Islamgarh, where he was deployed to stop a rally for Muzaffarabad under the banner of the Jammu Kashmir Joint Awami Action Committee (JAAC). The JAAC, which has traders at the forefront in most parts of the state, has been seeking the provision of electricity as per hydropower generation cost in AJK, subsidised wheat flour and an end to the privileges of the elite class. They called for the strike following the arrest of at least 70 of their members in raids on Thursday. Reports emerged in the wake of the protests on Sunday that three Rangers battalions had entered the territory through Kohala and were awaiting further orders. However, AJK Minister for Rural Development Faisal Mumtaz Rathore confirmed that the Rangers, due to the intervention of President Asif Zardari, were called back as soon as they entered Azad Kashmir since the situation had calmed down. Meanwhile, in Islamabad, former prime minister of AJK Sardar Abdul Qayyum Niazi slammed the deployment, calling it a drama and an attempt to score political points. First they send them, then call them back, what is this? the ex-AJK PM said. Those fighting for their rights and engaging in protest are free to do so, but they must remain peaceful, Niazi said in a press conference. He added that they (the protestors) must not give the enemy a chance to sow discord within the territory and create infighting. In a post on Facebook, Rathore acknowledged the public demands for cheap electricity, but admitted that addressing them was out of his hands. The big demand of the people, the demand for cheap electricity and the end of loadshedding, falls under the jurisdiction of the Government of Pakistan, Rathore said. Urging the public to remain peaceful, he said, In this one year [I have been in office], I have never been against the right to peaceful protest and [never] supported violence against people. In the aftermath of the protests, JAAC leader Shaukat Nawaz Mir reiterated that the committee is a peaceful organisation and willing to negotiate with the authorities to ensure the provision of cheap electricity and cheap flour. He also appreciated the withdrawal of the Rangers from the area. We have planned another shutter-down strike, he told reporters on Sunday. We have been peaceful for the last year and always will be a peaceful movement. This territory and its institutions and police are our own. Mir maintained that the JAAC is advocating for the rights of the public in AJK, but it is the bureaucrats who do not understand the publics needs that are doing the damage. The JAAC is peaceful and open to negotiations, Mir added, requesting to be notified by the authorities about decisions taken. We do not want to hurt anyone. He also slammed the federal government for not cutting down spending while at the same time claiming they have no room in the budget to subsidise electricity or flour. The government claims they cant provide cheap electricity and flour because they have no budget, but they have the money for watches and cars, Mir said, adding that the federal government and the prime minister should be ashamed. I dont want my forum to be controversial, Mir said. We are made up of respectable politicians  the local council is standing with us. The JAAC leader added that the movement was successful since members of multiple parties and councils are on our side. Our nation is conscious now. There is no politics here, we just want our rights and identity. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Fight till the last ball, PCB chief tells cricket team in Dublin
Description : Pakistan Cricket Board (PCB) Chairman Mohsin Naqvi on Sunday told the national team to fight till the last ball ahead of the second match of a three-match T20 series against Ireland. As he met players of the mens national team in the Irish capital of Dublin, the PCB quoted him as saying: Fight till the last ball; the competition should be apparent.
On Friday, Ireland recorded their maiden T20 win against Pakistan who could not defend a solid-looking 182-5 after being put in to bat first, dealing a shocking blow to the Babar Azam-led sides preparations for the World Cup, which is taking place next month in the United States. The loss to Ireland, who are in Pakistans group in the T20 World Cup, came after a series draw on home soil to a New Zealand squad missing most of their first-choice players. With Babar only recently reinstated as captain, it was another bump in the road for their tournament preparation.
Todays match will start at 7pm, with Ireland leading the series by 1-0. In a post on X, the PCB shared a video of Naqvi meeting the Green Shirts and speaking to them, adding that a detailed discussion on the action plan took place during the two-hour-long meetup. Encouraging the team, the PCB chairman urged the players to play with hard work, passion and a professional approach. He noted that T20 cricket needed a unique and aggressive approach, adding that victory was only possible if cricket was played in a modern manner. An action plan can be formulated while sitting in a room but the real test is on the ground, where the performance should be visible, the PCB quoted him as telling the team. Naqvi praised all players as undoubtedly talented, professional and the best, adding that the teams bowling attack was splendid. However, he emphasised that great attention was required when fielding so that the opponent cannot get any chance to score. The players are the hope for Pakistan and you have to meet the nations expectations. Teamwork is the fundamental thing for victory, the PCB chairman said. He noted that the public loved cricket and had expectations from the team. Naqvi said that success would come if all 11 of the players in the team performed with unity. No one is accepting the loss in the first match against Ireland. The real test after Ireland and England is the World Cup, he added. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Canada arrests fourth Indian national in killing of Sikh activist
Description : A fourth Indian national was charged by Canadian authorities on Saturday in the 2023 killing of a separatist Sikh leader in Vancouver. Amandeep Singh, 22, was already being held for unrelated gun charges before being charged with first-degree murder and conspiracy to commit murder in the slaying of Hardeep Singh Nijjar. Three other Indian nationals were arrested this month. The killing sparked a diplomatic row between Ottawa and New Delhi when Prime Minister Justin Trudeau linked Indian intelligence to the killing. Nijjar  who immigrated to Canada in 1997 and became a citizen in 2015  had advocated for a separate Sikh state, known as Khalistan, carved out of India. He had been wanted by Indian authorities for alleged terrorism and conspiracy to commit murder  allegations he denied. He was shot dead on June 18, 2023, by masked assailants in the parking lot of the Sikh temple he led in suburban Vancouver. Trudeau announced several months later that Canada had credible allegations connecting Indian intelligence to the slaying. India dismissed the allegations as absurd and responded furiously, briefly curbing visas for Canadians and forcing Ottawa to withdraw diplomats. In November, the US Justice Department charged an Indian citizen living in the Czech Republic with allegedly plotting a similar assassination attempt on American soil. Prosecutors said in unsealed court documents that an Indian government official was also involved in the planning. The shock allegations came after US President Joe Biden hosted Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi for a rare state visit, as Washington seeks closer ties with India against Chinas growing influence. US intelligence agencies have assessed that the plot on American soil was approved by Indias top spy official at the time, Samant Goel, the Washington Post reported in April. Canada is home to some 770,000 Sikhs, who make up about two per cent of the countrys population, with a vocal minority calling for an independent state of Khalistan. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Second night of auroras seen amid extreme solar storm
Description : Auroras lit up skies across swaths of the planet for the second night in a row on Saturday, after already dazzling Earthlings from the United States to Tasmania to the Bahamas the day before. A powerful solar storm  which could continue into Sunday  has triggered spectacular celestial shows usually confined to the far northern reaches of the planet, hence their nickname of the northern lights. I have the sensation of living through a historic night in France [] It was really charged, with solar particles and emotions, Eric Lagadec, an astrophysicist at the Observatoire de Cote dAzur, wrote on social media after the first night. Find good spots, away from the lights, with a clear view to the north! Late on Saturday evening, pictures again started trickling onto social media as people in the United States reported sightings, though not as strong as Friday nights. The first of several coronal mass ejections (CMEs)  expulsions of plasma and magnetic fields from the Sun   came just after 4pm GMT on Friday, according to the US-based National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)s Space Weather Prediction Center (SWPC). It was later upgraded to an extreme geomagnetic storm   the first since the Halloween Storms of October 2003 that caused blackouts in Sweden and damaged power infrastructure in South Africa. Fridays storm was listed as hitting level five geomagnetic conditions  the highest on the scale. Saturday saw G3 to G5 conditions, with G4 or higher conditions predicted Sunday and G3 conditions possible into Monday. But no major disruptions to power or communications networks appear to have been reported this time around, despite initial worries from authorities. There have only been preliminary reports of power grid irregularities, degradation to high-frequency communications, GPS and possibly satellite navigation, the SWPC said. Elon Musk, whose Starlink satellite internet operator has some 5,000 satellites in low Earth orbit, said his satellites were under a lot of pressure, but holding up so far. However Chinas National Centre for Space Weather issued a red alert on Saturday morning, warning the storm will impact communications and navigation in most areas of the country, state news agency Xinhua reported. Auroras were visible in the northern half of the country, according to media reports. Excitement over the phenomenon   and otherworldly photos of pink, green and purple night skies   popped up across the world, from Mont Saint-Michel on the French coast to Payette, Idaho  in the western United States  to Australias island state of Tasmania.
People pose for photos as a geomagnetic storm lights up the night sky above the Bonneville Salt Flats on May 10 in Wendover, Utah.  AFP
Unlike solar flares, which travel at the speed of light and reach Earth in around eight minutes, CMEs travel at a more sedate pace, with officials putting the current average at 800 kilometres per second. The CMEs emanated from a massive sunspot cluster that is 17 times wider than our planet. People with eclipse glasses can also look for the sunspot cluster during the day. The Sun is approaching the peak of an 11-year cycle that brings heightened activity. NOAAs Brent Gordon encouraged the public to try to capture the night sky with phone cameras even if they couldnt see auroras with their naked eyes. Youd be amazed at what you see in that picture versus what you see with your eyes. Fluctuating magnetic fields associated with geomagnetic storms induce currents in long wires, including power lines, which can potentially lead to blackouts. Long pipelines can also become electrified, leading to engineering problems. Spacecraft are also at risk from high doses of radiation, although the atmosphere prevents this from reaching Earth. NASA has a dedicated team looking into astronaut safety and can ask astronauts on the International Space Station to move to places within the outpost that are better shielded. Even pigeons and other species that have internal biological compasses could be affected. Pigeon handlers have noted a reduction in birds coming home during geomagnetic storms, according to NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The most powerful geomagnetic storm in recorded history, known as the Carrington Event after British astronomer Richard Carrington, occurred in September 1859. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : ADB links support with IMFs clean chit
Description :   Given my interactions with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the dialogue decisiveness of the current government, I feel very hopeful that there will be a successor programme from the Fund, said the Asian Development Banks (ADB) Country Director for Pakistan Yong Ye in an exclusive interview on the sidelines of ADBs 57th Annual Meeting in Tbilisi this week. Tacitly indicating that support from ADB would only be possible with a clean chit from the Fund, Mr Ye expressed cautious optimism for the economy. Highlighting the uncertainties from last year, Mr Ye termed the IMF agreement announced in June as a miracle. Since then, however, he said, the caretaker government did a good job stabilising the economy under the Funds Stand-By Arrangement. More importantly, he added, with the IMF agreement in place, the central banks foreign exchange reserves increased from $4.4 billion to over $9bn in the week ending on May 3. While the country may still be in the ICU, its immediate liquidity crisis has been sorted, and default has been avoided. This has given some confidence to the markets, he said. Record highs of PSX Commenting on the frequent new highs of the Pakistan Stock Exchange (PSX), Mr Ye observed that previously, when the eurobond payment was due, there had been a lot of hype in the media with speculations about whether the country would be able to repay or default. Such pieces did not induce courage and the markets started fluctuating, contributing to a fluctuating exchange rate. Banks top official says Pakistan has sorted out immediate liquidity crisis, but still in ICU This time around, in April, when the $1bn eurobond payment was due, it was paid without fanfare, indicating much better market confidence. Other positive indicators, such as a narrowing external account deficit and recovering remittances, have also improved investor confidence. However, fiscal deficit challenges remain. One major reason behind them is the high interest rate and high debt servicing burden. Act on what you know In my first meeting with Finance Minister Muhammad Aurangzeb, he showed his commitment to implementing and acting on reforms, said Mr Ye. Pakistan does not need more economic prescriptions, he said, agreeing with the finance ministers recent statements. He said the general perception is that Pakistan knows what it needs to do but never does it. Act on what you know needs to be done. He emphasised that the ADB management wants to be with the government in this difficult time. The agency understands the need to ensure that the debt is sustainable rather than an added burden that does not remove the constraints the country is facing. While the economy is recovering, there is still uncertainty moving forward. The removal of this uncertainty depends very much on the governments commitment and ability to implement economic and structural reforms. A special arrangement Mr Ye emphasised the importance of investment in reviving the economy and the role the Special Investment Facilitation Council (SIFC) could play. My understanding of SIFC is that it is a special arrangement to attract foreign direct investment from some targeted countries, he said. From the ADBs point of view, while the SIFC may be a quick short-term solution, Pakistan still needs to look for long-term systematic solutions to attract foreign direct investment. This would require an overall enabling environment with improved regulations and transparency. Given past unsuccessful incidents such as Reko Diq, SIFC, at least in the short run, can demonstrate the countrys potential and ability for investment, which can then be further broadened for other countries. An important element in attracting FDI is the ability of firms to repatriate profit out of the country. At the moment, investors may believe that while earning money in Pakistan is possible, repatriating profits is challenging. Non-productivity of real estate The country needs to increase its revenue and rationalise expenditures, Mr Ye remarked. As an example, he highlights the real estate sector where a lot of savings are invested. The real estate sector is just financial addition with no value addition. If the country invests in its natural resources instead, the country will start rolling, he said. Inflation is on a downward trend, and if this trend continues, the monetary policy rate will come down, Mr Ye opinioned, resulting in a smaller burden of debt servicing and more fiscal room. This will also unlock the investment and borrowing by the private sector, he hoped. Since there is a lot of pent-up investment demand during the period of high interest rates, Pakistan may enter into a boom cycle when the rates start coming down. But for the revival to be sustainable, it all comes back to reforms, he said.  Remaining pledges While ADB was among the institutions that pledged support after the disastrous floods of 2022, almost the entire amount has yet to be disbursed. ADB had pledged about $1.5bn, of which only $108.79 million has been released according to a media report, with a further $340.9m expected this year. In response to why there has been a delay, Mr Ye said that the amount pledged was for reconstruction and that the process cannot be rushed. The damages have to be assessed along with the ground realities, keeping in mind the new climate risk profile and the possibility that these areas may be flooded again, he said. Pointing out that water was still standing in some areas till the start of this year, Mr Ye said that the new climate risk profile needs to be assessed before the feasibility study. Some roads need to be redesigned, followed by the procurement process, contract award, and finally, disbursement. The entire process is lengthy. Mr Ye identified several critical areas for Pakistans long-term economic growth. These include controlling inflation, reducing the fiscal deficit, and diversifying the export base. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Govt hints at raising wheat purchase target
Description :  Drive to buy 400,000 tonnes of grain kicks off; farmers want wheat procured from across Punjab
 Kissan leader urges govt to ensure official rate of staple, terms proposed subsidy a pittance LAHORE: The Pakistan Agricultural Storage and Services Corporation Limited (Passco) on Saturday began its second phase of wheat procurement from Faisalabad in line with a decision of the federal government to procure 400,000 tonnes more than the original target of 1.4 million tonnes. As he kick-started the second phase, Food Minister Rana Tanveer hinted at the possibility of further increasing the target to facilitate farmers. Passco had originally aimed to purchase 1.4m tonnes, but after farmers started protesting, the pressure on the federal and provincial governments piled on and the premier decided to increase the target to 1.8m tonnes. As of now, Passco has achieved 98 per cent of the initial target and distribution of gunny bags is already underway to meet the increased target. Farmers, however, are not happy with the governments decision to procure slightly more wheat than intended. They said Passco  a federal body  operated in 13 out of 97 tehsils in Punjab and the decision to purchase additional wheat from designated areas would have a negligible impact. According to farmers, the tradeable surplus this year is expected to be about 10m tonnes and buying 400,000 tonnes would hardly make any difference. Punjab, on the other hand, is reluctant to procure wheat from growers despite province-wide agitations and the persistent stance of farmers. This has also caused a significant impact on the price of wheat, with the staple being sold at a rate much lower than the official price of Rs3,900 per 40kg. The Pakistan Kissan Ittehad claimed that farmers had lost Rs1,150 billion under the wheat head alone due to the crashing prices which reportedly dipped below Rs3,000 per 40kg. Instead of procurement, the Punjab government said it would compensate farmers with interest-free loans of Rs150bn. Kissan leader Khalid Mahmood Khokar, however, is not impressed, saying the paltry subsidy came at a cost of Rs1,150bn. Instead of this gimmickry, please ensure an officially declared price, which the provincial government had itself calculated, announced, and promised, Mr Khalid urged the Punjab government. The crisis Pakistan is going through the most difficult wheat season of its history, exacerbated by policy failure and the import of millions of tonnes of wheat shortly before the bumper harvest. The bumper crop followed a record import of 3.5m tonnes by the private sector allegedly due to the weakness of the caretaker regime.
Against the backdrop of such a huge import, hoarders also released their stock to earn profit. The releases of stock by the hoarders and the import of the commodity flooded the market and even met the entire domestic requirement, leaving Passco and the Punjab Food Department with 4m tonnes of unexhausted stock. The 3.5m tonnes imports were staggered in a way, in the name of sustained supplies, that it overlapped with domestic harvesting season and created havoc for the domestic market, explained Muhammad Ramzan, a wheat trader from Lahore. At the start of this month, the Punjab government had promised a probe into the wheat scandal against the backdrop of protests by the farmers. On Friday, the farmers resumed their protests from Multan against the provincial governments decision to not buy wheat from farmers. At the protest, PKI leader Khokhar had said the agitation would continue against the government in every district of the province till the acceptance of their demands. He had said the federal government was procuring the wheat in 16 tehsils of the province, while the Punjab government had not purchased even a single grain so far. Federal government should also buy wheat from other tehsils of the province, he had demanded. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : KP governor, CM Gandapur exchange threats in acrid spat
Description : PESHAWAR / DERA ISMAIL KHAN: The acrimony between Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Chief Minister Ali Amin Khan Gandapur and Governor Faisal Karim Kundi intensified on Saturday when the two leaders threatened each other with dire consequences. A day after the governors fiery speech, Chief Minister Gandapur warned Governor Kundi to stay within the limits of his constitutional position and avoid making olitical statements. After appearing in an anti-terrorism court in connection with the murder of former KP law minister Sardar Israrullah Khan Gandapur, the CM who belongs to the PTI said he could use his powers to banish Mr Kundi from Governor House. This Governor House is not your property. Dont force me to  turn it into a museum and open it for the public.
I will shift you to a two-room annexe, said Mr Gandapur. He went on to say that even fuel for the governors official vehicles comes from the budget of the provincial government and threatened to stop it if the governor who belongs to PPP didnt refrain from political statements, below-the-belt remarks and confrontation. Gandapur warns Kundi will be banished from official residence for indulging in politics, confrontation Youre the governor; politics is not your job, Mr Gandapur warned, calling himself the elected representative who came to power with the voters mandate. The CM added that if the governor did not pay heed to his warning, he would seek his removal. [T]he letter which notified you [as governor] will also denotify you. In a hard-hitting speech on Friday, Governor Kundi had indirectly accused the CM of being involved in the killing of former law minister Mr Israrullah and ANP leader Umar Khattab Sherani.
Mr Israrullah was killed in a suicide attack in his hometown of Kulachi near Dera Ismail Khan in October 2013. While government officials blamed the Waziristan-based Gandapur group for the bombing, a little-known shadowy group, Ansarul Mujahideen, claimed responsibility. ANPs Mr Sherani was murdered in December 2021, a day before the provinces local government elections, which he was contesting as a candidate for the post of D.I. Khan mayor. The governor said that if he relinquished his constitutional post, he would prove to be a bigger nemesis for CM Gandapur. Mr Kundi also warned that protecting the Governor House was his constitutional duty and whoever tried to occupy it would be dragged on roads. This was an apparent reply to Mr Gandapurs May 9 statement in which he warned against efforts to impose governors rule in KP and said PTI activists would occupy the Governor House. Want good ties with CM Meanwhile, in conversation with Dawn, Mr Kundi said he hoped for good relations with the chief minister, but whoever talked about occupying the Governor House will be answered befittingly. People of KP shouldnt suffer in the fight between the prime minister, governor and chief minister, he said, advising the provincial government to improve the law and order situation. He recalled the kidnapping of a sessions judge in Tank last month and claimed the chief minister paid extortion money for his release. Expected animosity The acrimonious relationship between the two leaders  both being bitter political rivals hailing from D.I.Khan  was expected since Mr Kundi was nominated for the post by his partys chairman, Bilawal Bhutto-Zardari. The CM expressed his disapproval of the appointment by not attending  Mr Kundis oath-taking ceremony last Saturday. A few days later, on May 8, the governor KP did not sign a summary moved by the provincial government to convene an assembly session, forcing the provincial government to requisition the session through the speaker to present the current fiscal budget, according to sources. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Footprints: the day the city of Karachi went berserk
Description : This article was originally published on May 12, 2017 KARACHI: Attempt after attempt fails to elicit comments from direct witnesses to the carnage that took place in Karachi on May 12 ten years ago. All these men served as judges in the countrys high courts and the apex court before they retired to re-join the legal fraternity as seasoned practitioners of the law. For each of my requests, I receive either excuse me, or sorry. Finally, one of them agrees to talk  but not openly.  Please dont mention my name, says the retired Sindh High Court judge as our conversation ends. You may write each and every word I have shared with you but not my name. I would prefer to be an anonymous source. One never knows here what can happen the next day: its better to stay away from even the memories of such controversial events. The ordeal he recalls of that bloody Saturday refreshes the grim memories of the city being under siege for nearly 24 hours, held hostage by forces in the face of whom even jurists and law-enforcers were helpless.  Two rival rallies had been planned that day  one by the legal fraternity, backed by parties then in the opposition, to welcome into the city the then deposed chief justice, Iftikhar Mohammed Chaudhry, and the other organised by the Muttahida Qaumi Movement (MQM), favoured by the then military dictator General Pervez Musharraf, in protest against the politicisation of the issue of the presidential reference against Mr Chaudhry. A certain level of fear had prevailed, but no one could have guessed the deeply disturbing events that were to follow  certainly not the then serving high court judge. I was travelling with my driver and armed guard to the Sindh High Court where the chief justice had to deliver an address when we were forced to stop near Sir Syed Girls College in Nazimabad, he says.  Armed motorcyclists surrounded his official, flag-bearing car, pulled out his driver and switched off its engine, seizing the keys. The bikers then bludgeoned the stationary car several times, so hard that its bumper fell off. In one of the busiest and most densely populated city neighbourhoods, a serving judge sat in fear.  I talked to them, he says. They were obviously aware that I was a high court judge. After debate and argument, they allowed me to leave but I reminded them that I couldnt because keys of my car had been snatched by one of them. Finally, the key was returned and the judge was allowed to leave. As he got back into his car, the men surrounding him came up with their last strike: they stripped his car of the national flag. At the nearest police station of Pak Colony, he waited for nearly two hours for police security to arrive, as promised by the Governors House after it was informed about the episode. Then came an SSP-ranking officer with his team to escort me, he says. The police left us some two kilometres from the Singh High Court building, saying that they could no longer help us. My driver parked the car at a safer place. Then, with my driver and guard, I walked to the high court to find all entrances blocked. Finally, I jumped over one of the walls to enter the building. If this was the experience of a high court judge, one can only imagine the situation for political workers. In anticipation of the two rallies, law enforcers had been put on high alert the day before. The fire brigade had been directed to remain on standby and hospitals were asked to ready themselves. But the next day, hapless citizens found that the city had been abandoned by the law-enforcement agencies, and armed youths were wandering at will. Nasir Khan, one of the Awami National Party workers, witnessed a few of them at Malir Halt. I meet Nasir almost at the same spot where he narrowly escaped death. As our rally from Quaidabad reached here [Malir Halt], it came under fire, he says. I miraculously remained unhurt but I watched two of my friends die from bullet wounds and several others fell injured. It was a terrible experience and even today I shiver while recalling that day. After 10 years, only eyewitness accounts of the May 12 events remain. Justice and any action on the part of the state are still awaited. Should we call ourselves humanity when the fallen remain un-avenged a year to a day since that fateful day in May? wrote Justice Qazi Faez Isa, a Supreme Court judge and former chief justice of the Balochistan High Court, in this paper in 2008. Years later, the question remains pertinent. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2017  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Mothers Day: Reflections of a mother
Description : This piece was originally published in Dawn, Young World on May 9, 2020. Spending sleepless nights while tending to children, feeding them, changing diapers, etc. are a part of life of every mother having infants. When the infants grow up a little, the next phase is to educate them, teach them manners and make them learn to be a part of the world out there. It is tough to do all that for me, like every other mother. After all it is not all I have to do. One has to focus on ones career and household chores at the same time, and fulfil ones duties towards other family members. Did I mention a me-time somewhere in all that I said? I guess not. There is no mentioning of it simply because there is no time left for me while doing all that I do. It is said that you learn about the true value of parents once you have children of your own. I have found this to be exactly true. The sacrifices and unconditional love it takes to be a mother has certainly made me realise the sacrifices my mother made in bringing me up. Looking back at my life, I wish I could change all those moments in my life when, as a child, I misbehaved with my mother. I also wish that I had spent more time with her and made life easier for her. As my children grow up, they seem to become less obedient and respectful. This really hurts. I see this as a general trend in all the children, nowadays. With some exceptions, the older they get, the less respect they show to their mother and elders in general. Having a mind of ones own is fine, but there cannot be any excuse for bad behaviour towards ones mother. And also just because your mother is less strict and more friendly than your father, it should not lead you to not show respect to her. Mothers like me do not want our children to be our puppets. All we ask for is recognition of our love and efforts. Expecting respectfulness is a part of that recognition. Every mother would love her child to come up to her and, as a minimum, thank her for her efforts. It would be great if the child could offer to help her in little ways. If nothing else, they should at least not leave any mess for the mother to clean up! Mothers Day is important, but it is more than just a special day. It is really a reminder that mothers deserve our respect and recognition for their love at all times. For a child to have this realisation certainly means more to mothers than having a card or flowers on Mothers Day. This is because it means that this realisation would translate into care and respect for ones mother. For my part, I have started taking care of my mother in all the ways I can. While I do not live with her, I try my best to stay in touch or visit her as much as I can. Taking care of her health and what she wants has become very important for me. It does not matter to me what others do or say about taking care of their mothers. All that matters is what my mother deserves. And that exactly is my message to you all! Do not look at what others do, think of what you can do for your mother, who deserves all the love and respect that one can. Mothers can be your friends too if you learn to share things with her. It is just a misunderstanding that they would not understand you or what you want. You can talk about anything with her: sports, cartoons, TV shows, super heroes, general knowledge, etc. You would be pleasantly surprised when you do end up confiding in her or discussing things with her. I am lucky that I get cards and flowers from my family on Mothers Day. But many things remain left to be desired on the other 364 days of the year. Still whatever my children do the rest of the year, I would never stop caring for and loving them. I guess thats what the motherhood is all about. Happy Mothers Day everyone, but make every day Mothers Day, for she never fails to make everyday special for her children. Published in Dawn, Young World, May 9th, 2020 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Indian elections
Description : THE Islamophobic rhetoric being employed by Narendra Modi for this election campaign has become shrill. Pakistan has nearly always been an electoral issue in India. However, this time, it is Indian Muslims who are bearing the brunt of the Indian prime ministers hate speech. Speaking in Rajasthan last month, he called Muslims infiltrators and said they produce too many children. In Gujarat, where, as chief minister, he had overseen the massacre of Muslims in 2002, he accused the Congress of seeking to loot Indias wealth and redistribute it among Muslims, and of organising a vote jihad against his leadership. Later, he accused the Congress and Muslims of stealing Hindu wealth and property.
Modis inflammatory rhetoric was followed by the BJPs campaign video portraying Muslims as outsiders who plundered Indias wealth. As concerns grew about communal violence, the video was removed. These allegations are a sequel to Modis public referencing of earlier conspiracy theories of love jihad (Muslims forcibly converting Hindu women and marrying them to increase the Muslim population) or land jihad (capturing land to construct religious structures and gaining control of Indias territory). Concerns that his rhetoric might incite further violence against Indian Muslims are increasing. Ordinarily, since Hindus are in a majority in India, it may be difficult to question the rationale of creating a Hindu state. However, two observations are in order. One, the expansionist designs of the cherished Hindu state seek the creation of an Akhand Bharat, a Hindu right fantasy, which would violate the territorial integrity of Nepal, Bangladesh, Pakistan, and Afghanistan, as per a map displayed in the new parliament building. This is not acceptable to the aforementioned independent states. Two, though the creation of a Hindu state should not translate into discrimination against minorities, regrettably this will be the case. The works of French political scientist Christophe Jaffrelot illustrate how Muslims, 14.5 per cent of Indias population, are grossly underrepresented in bureaucracy, the judiciary, police, and legislative organs. They are second-class citizens.
The Muslim-majority area of Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmiri is also being subjected to demographic engineering. The destruction of the centuries-old Babri Masjid by Hindu zealots in 1992 and the construction of a temple in its place has set a precedent that might be followed for other historic mosques. This contrasts sharply with the UAEs gesture of permitting a Hindu temple in Abu Dhabi. Modis anti-Muslim rhetoric is raising concerns of violence. Analysts are also pointing out the fascist tendencies of the BJP regime, a steep decline in democratic values, and a departure from the moorings of pluralism and secularism on which modern India was founded. In her book The Incarcerations, Alpa Shah contends that Modis India is using its national security apparatus to incarcerate ordinary citizens for their dissenting views. Commenting on the book, Arundhati Roy stated that this was about criminalisation and incarceration of dissent itself. Strikingly, the Modi regime has also used art and culture to project the Hindutva philosophy. Kunal Purohits book H-Pop: The Secretive World of Hindutva Pop Stars shows how Hindutva pop stars and influencers are being used to spread the message of Hindu supremacy and create acceptance of Hindutvas core beliefs. Apart from this, Modi is playing on his governments accomplishments: making India the worlds fifth largest economy; the construction of 50,000 kilometres of national highways; boosting Indias military spending; building Vikrant, Indias first domestically built aircraft carrier; and the Chandrayaan-3 moon landing. His prospects of winning a third term have been bolstered by a weak opposition. Despite the formation of the Congress-led 37-party INDIA coalition, there is no real challenge. What has bolstered his outreach is Indias enhanced global standing. In his book Why Bharat Matters, S. Jaishankar presents India as a leader of the global south and makes a case for the rejuvenation of India as a civilisational state.
There are some lessons that Pakistan could learn from Indias electoral process. One, despite the large scale of Indias elections (969 million registered voters; 1m polling stations) and the use of electronic voting machines, election results are largely accepted without much ado. Two, there is no caretaker government, as the incumbents become caretakers in a way, and refrain from announcing major policy decisions or sanctioning expenditure for development schemes. If Modi wins a third term, he is likely to maintain his pro-Hindutva, anti-Muslim, and hegemonic attitude towards regional countries, particularly Pakistan. The write is a former foreign secretary and chairman of Sanober Institute Islamabad. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Who can rock the hybrid boat?
Description : A NUMBER of developments over the past week suggest that the establishment is keen to enforce/ maintain the status quo and the only impediment in its path may be an assertive superior judiciary that has been increasingly finding its feet in recent weeks. If jailed PTI leader and former prime minister Imran Khans article in UKs conservative right-wing Telegraph newspaper blaming the military leadership directly for all his woes the week before was not hint enough of the state of play, two public statements by the latter clarified issues rather unambiguously. The first came in the DG ISPRs press briefing, which was ostensibly called to discuss Afghanistan-based terrorist groups involvement in attacks on Chinese nationals working on development projects in the country. But in response to a couple of questions about the PTI and Imran Khan related to the events of May 9 last year, the DG ISPR stated unequivocally that the only path to rehabilitation for the political party and its leaders was to seek forgiveness for attacking your own forces.
Then, perhaps, talks could happen and that too with political parties (ie, the government), as the military had nothing to do with politics. Imran Khan has been consistent in saying he wouldnt talk to the powerless political parties and that a meaningful dialogue is possible only with the military. The DG ISPR also lamented the delay in the prosecution and sentencing of all those responsible for the May mayhem  including the leaders and mastermind against whom irrefutable evidence has been gathered and submitted  and, in doing so, appeared to hint at the establishments frustrations with what it perceives as roadblocks being erected by the judiciary. The content of the live presser evoked an equally adamant response from the PTI, which went on the offensive, reiterating its stance that May 9 was a false flag operation, accusing the militarys spokesman of being economical with the truth, and saying it would be happy to live with the findings of an impartial judicial commission into the May 9 events and would even apologise if found to be at fault. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. The military spokesman had pre-empted this demand in his briefing earlier by saying if a probe were to happen, as was being demanded, it ought to start with 2014, and not nine years later. The 2014 PTI sit-in in the federal capital was said to have been instigated and backed by the then ISI chief. This was the first indication that the military was prepared to hold its own accountable for past follies, if it paved the way for the trials and sentencing of PTI leaders it says were responsible for the attacks on defence installations in a number of cities in Punjab and KP. While the spokesman left nothing to the imagination, on the first anniversary of May 9, the army chief added his voice to his chief spokesmans in terms of stressing the need for punishing the perpetrators of the violence a year earlier, also lashing out against what he called digital terrorism.
This indicates that harsher curbs on social media are planned. So far, the PTI has had overwhelming social media dominance and had been able to keep a step ahead of its adversaries, but we will find out soon whether it has what it takes to bypass software the Chinese have developed over the years (and Pakistan has reportedly acquired) and successfully used to block dissident content. With this ever-widening gulf between the establishment and the party it once saw as a panacea for all that ails Pakistan, the one thing that many felt could force a rethink in the establishment would have been a public manifestation of the immense support enjoyed by the PTI, as evidenced in last Februarys elections. Many Pakistan watchers keenly waited all day for multitudes of PTI supporters to spill out onto the roads and streets of major urban conurbations on the party leaders call to break the shackles and protest on May 9. But the brutal crackdown of the past one year seems to have knocked the wind out of the partys sails and worn down the workers will. People may turn out to vote for it in droves, but did not appear prepared to risk life, limb and liberty in coming out for mass protests. Some small localised protests did happen, but had zero impact in the sense of influencing decision-making in the corridors of power. Going forward, a couple of factors will play a role in steering developments. The first and foremost will be the confidence the army chief has in his control over his institution. His predecessor appointed a dozen major generals to three stars in his final six weeks in office and left the incumbent little room in terms of forming his own team. Natural attrition and the more dramatic exit of a couple of three stars on disciplinary grounds recently has, 18 months down the line, given the chief an opportunity to place senior officers of his own choosing in key roles which will give him greater freedom of action both inside and outside the institution. The promotion of three officers this week, including the DG ISPR, to three stars was another step in that direction. The military saw May 9 as a coup against the chief, a failed attempt to dislodge him from office. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. With the PTI protests failing to gather momentum, the only impediment in his path seems to be an increasingly assertive superior judiciary. It can and will, in all likelihood, challenge the establishments pre-eminence in decision-making. It isnt clear how the latter plans to deal with that, especially because it believes that a direly needed economic revival is only possible under the umbrella of a hybrid set-up and in a relatively calm political environment. Only the judiciary can rock its boat now. The writer is a former editor of Dawn. abbas.nasir@hotmail.com Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Looming pension crisis cries out for corrective measures
Description : Pension reform is again a hot topic, but this time, bureaucrats will make it appear as if it is intended to benefit top officials. The reforms go beyond just raising the retirement age or taxing pensions. Instead, a series of actions, similar to those that were done in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP), should be seriously considered to reduce the cost of pensions to the government exchequer. The national pension cost will reach nearly Rs2 trillion in FY24, and it is predicted to rise to Rs10tr in the next decade if no reforms are implemented. In 2002-03, the pension cost stood at Rs25 billion, but in a span of just 20 years, it skyrocketed to over Rs1.5tr. Pension reforms have previously been tested in KP and generated the expected cost-saving results. It is high time to rationalise the existing pension programme and transition to more modern schemes available in developing and developed countries. Last week, Finance Minister Muhammad Aurangzeb proposed to raise the retirement age from 60 to 65 years. It has sparked controversy over whether the government intends to benefit only a select few individuals. This decision has both advantages and disadvantages. In KP, the age restriction was raised to 63 years in 2019 with a projected annual savings of Rs20bn. However, the decision was reversed due to strong protest from bureaucrats, and the court also overturned the decision. However, KPs other pension reforms remained in effect. KP Advisor on Finance Muzzammil Aslam has a different take on raising the age restriction than his predecessor, who implemented a series of reforms. Mr Aslam believes that the lump sum payment of pension payments will be delayed for the next five years, providing some breathing room for the time being. This will allow the government to show a lower budget deficit. The net impact will increase when the five-year allowances are added to the basic salary, which will be used to pay the pension. The age extension will postpone payments, but total payouts to employees will climb over the following five years. While these efforts provide some relief in the short term, crucial steps must be implemented to address the increasing pension liabilities. The governments liabilities have jumped from Rs25bn in FY03 to Rs2tr in FY24 There is another idea to tax pensions. It may also face political challenges. However, the KP government has imposed a 5pc pension tax on grades 17 and above on their executive allowance. It is estimated that this measure alone will generate Rs150bn in contributions to a pay-as-you-go pension system. This was not an easy decision, but it was made in KP to obtain some contribution from existing employees. The federal government can look into this step in response to opposition to taxing pensions. KP reforms In 2004, based on recommendations from a World Bank project, the India implemented a national pension scheme wherein employee contributions are matched by the government. Pakistan did not choose to adopt it since it was not anticipated that the cost would rise so dramatically over the next 20 years. Taimur Khan Jhagra, former finance minister of KP, took the lead in implementing a series of pension reforms, including the introduction of a contributory pension scheme for new employees beginning July 1, 2022. Few substantial changes were made to the existing pension programme. A well-known 13-tier pension system was in place, covering the pensioners widow, children, parents, siblings, sisters, and grandchildren. KP confined it to direct dependents. The federal government did the same last year, but other provinces have not followed suit. The previous PTI government raised KP and Punjabs minimum retirement age to 55 from 45, reducing KPs pension bill by Rs20bn alone. KP consolidated various pensions into a single one. Previously, individuals could receive two pensions simultaneously, with an active employee receiving both a salary and a pension. The major reform is the implementation of a contributing pension scheme for new employees. Under this programme, the KP government contributes 12pc and employees contribute 10pc. So far, 40,000 staff have been hired under this system starting July 1, 2022. There are additional critical reforms that the KP and federal governments should implement, such as revisiting the single Universal Pay Scale between Grades 1 and 22. Pay in provinces is decoupled from the Centre and between departments, allowing each department to develop a pay scale appropriate for their budget and the market value of their professions. Pension reforms are greatly needed. The question is whether the state will be able to sustain pension payments for the next 10 to 15 years. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : SMOKERS CORNER: KHAN AND THE GENERALS
Description : In May 2023, a recorded phone call  allegedly between the mother-in-law of the former Chief Justice of Pakistan (CJP) Umar Atta Bandial, and the wife of a lawyer-member of Imran Khans populist Pakistan Tehreek-i-Insaf (PTI)  was leaked on social media. In the call, the two ladies can be heard criticising the coalition government made up of the parties that had ousted Khans regime in April 2022 through an act of parliament. At one point in the leaked conversation, the mother-in-law laments, Yeh kambakht martial law bhi tau nahin lagaatay! [These cursed people dont even impose martial law!] Bykambakht,she meant the military establishment (ME). The conversation was surreal on many levels. Khan had been the blue-eyed boy of the ME, until he had a falling out with his makers. From 2011 till he was elected as prime minister in 2018, the ME had successfully shaped Khans political rise in a highly coordinated manner. His popularity was first established within the rank and file of the military. Then, some TV journalists were brought on board, followed by the induction of some vital members of the judiciary.
This troika  the ME, the electronic media and the judiciary  was complimented by the trained social media wing of Khans PTI to proliferate narratives pitched against the two older mainstream parties, the Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) and the Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP). The two were deeply demonised as being corrupt. After his ouster, Imran Khan was convinced that the establishment had betrayed him, and the May 9-10 protests last year were an attempt to rally support amongst pro-Khan factions in the military. However, any military intervention was drastically overestimated by his supporters A constituency that had initially been built by the former military dictator Gen Pervez Musharraf, and which mostly consisted of middle-class and upper-middle-class Pakistanis, was navigated by the ME and the media in such a manner that it eventually fell in Khans lap. This became a quadrilateral elite, comprising the ME, the media, the judiciary and the middle classes. After Khans ouster in April 2022, he began to publicly lambast the ME, accusing it of betraying him. But the truth is, due to the many abject failures of Khans government, the ME had begun to gradually distance itself from him months before he was ousted. In February 2022, Bandial became the CJP. He was cut from the same cloth that at least four of his predecessors were. These included Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry and, even more so, Justice Saqib Nasir, Justice Asif Khosa and Justice Gulzar Ahmad. Anti-PTI parties often accused them of being overtly pro-Khan. Justice Bandial was accused of having a soft corner for Khan. Truth is, Bandial wasnt very good at hiding this soft corner. Now the question is, during the time of the aforementioned phone call leak, when Khan was holding angry rallies and condemning the ME, why was Bandials mother-in-law yearning for a military takeover? Equally surreal was the presence of banners in some pro-Khan rallies with We Want Martial Law written on them. Also, why did the PTI  by planning last years violent riots on May 9 and 10, in which PTI supporters and members attacked military property  believe that this would cause a split in the armed forces and bring pro-Khan generals to power? Many academics who study coups are of the view that, if the conditions allow, street protests can be followed by a coup detat. According to the political scientist Scott A Tyson, protests are often a signal to the elites to intervene.
The elites in this context are the military and political elites. These may also include the higher judiciary and business elites. A regime facing the protests, too, is made up of political elites. Once the anti-regime elites decide that the protests are clearly signalling for an intervention, this is then communicated to the state elites. The media too plays a role in this. Its reporting of the protests may strengthen the signal and galvanise the military to intervene. The mother-in-laws kambakht lament was expressing a desperate yearning within sections of economic elites for military intervention. This nature of signalling was loud and clear on numerous WhatsApp groups when Khan was holding rallies against his ouster. The signal became even more obvious when the We Want Martial Law banners began to appear at the rallies. Some media personnel also started enhancing the signal to the ME. But by late 2022, the MEs top leadership had changed. A general who had earlier exited the project that was set up to facilitate Khans rise became the new army chief. Yet, PTI believed that many remnants of the project were still active within the military. I believe that with the judiciary still in facilitation mode, the notion of causing a split within the military to replace the new military chief with pro-Khan generals was the brainwave of some retired military men who were well-versed in the theories of post-protest coups. Once the signal to intervene in Khans post-ouster rallies was ignored by the new ME, a violent uprising was conceived that was to target the new ME. The uprising was enacted to evoke the concerns of the supposed pro-Khan generals. The signal now was: eject the new army chief and intervene (on the side of Khan) to avoid an all-out civil war. This plan could not have been formulated without the input of some retired officers. Many of them had been quite vocal in their support for Khan.
The violent May 9 and 10 protests were orchestrated by a political elite (PTI) against another set of elites (the coalition government) to signal the need for an intervention to judicial and military elites. But, according to Tyson, whether or not a coup will succeed is generally not certain to elites. This uncertainty is caused by the uncertainty regarding the actions of other elites. The other elite, in the context of the May 9 and 10 riots, was the military. An intervention by pro-Khan officers was drastically overestimated by the planners and the plan collapsed. The coalition government was able to withstand the assault. The new military chief began to swiftly oust the remaining pro-Khan elements from the military  even though those remaining in the judiciary are now trying to avoid suffering a similar fate through a pushback in the name of the independence of the judiciary.This, too, is quite surreal. Published in Dawn, EOS, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : A turbulent 2023
Description : PAKISTAN faced a tumultuous year in 2023 marked by severe economic distress and a sharp erosion of civil liberties. As documented in the HRCPs annual report, the year was nothing short of a human rights crisis on multiple fronts. Economic hardship was pervasive, with back-breaking inflation  nearly 40pc  and low growth hitting the common citizen the hardest. Protests were widespread, ranging from government employees striking against delayed salaries and pension issues to political demonstrations demanding timely elections. The state responded with indifference and sometimes outright violence, underlining its disregard for the peoples constitutional rights. The political arena was no less strained: the year saw unprecedented violence following the arrest of former prime minister Imran Khan; subsequent PTI-led riots were met with harsh government crackdowns. This included mass arrests and the controversial use of military courts for civilian trials. Political dissent was stifled and freedom of speech curtailed with internet shutdowns and media gags on reporting of certain political leaders. Sadly, the governments management of the turmoil involved significant overreach, impacting judicial independence and skewing the electoral landscape. The swift passage of laws granting sweeping powers to intelligence agencies and restricting media freedoms points to the governments alarming propensity to consolidate power at the cost of transparency and accountability.
Human rights violations were not limited to political suppression. The report highlights severe abuses such as enforced disappearances, alleged extrajudicial killings and custodial torture by state agencies. The societal impact of these policies and actions has been devastating. Moreover, marginalised communities, including women, children, religious minorities, and transgender persons, faced increased violence and discrimination. Notable too was the harsh crackdown on peaceful assemblies like the Baloch Yakjehti Councils protests. On the international front, despite engaging with global human rights mechanisms, Pakistans selective adherence to recommendations concerning enforced disappearances and the use of the death penalty reflected a reluctance to fully align with international human rights standards. Rulers would do well to remember that adhering to those standards will help maintain Pakistans desperately needed GSP-Plus status and be a more inviting place for foreign investment.
As the year proceeds, it is imperative for the state to reconsider its approach to human rights. The government must ensure the independence of the judiciary, respect for democratic processes, and protection for all citizens against the abuse of power. Laws that infringe on freedom of expression and assembly should be reviewed and reformed. Additionally, there should be a concerted effort to address the economic inequalities that underpin much of the social unrest. For a stable and prosperous Pakistan, human rights must be more than an ideal; they must be an integral part of governance and everyday life. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Love knows no boundaries at Karachis Edhi Home nursery for special children
Description : KARACHI: Its one day to Mothers Day and the childrens nursery at the Edhi Home in Mithadar is decorated with balloons and posters along with framed photographs of the late couple Abdul Sattar Edhi and Bilquis Edhi. Children in the classrooms are busy making greeting cards, drawing pictures of themselves and the only woman whom they have come to know as their mother, their Chhoti (younger) Mummy Sabah Faisal Edhi. The duties of the busy mother of so many children, including four of her own, starts from early morning. After tending to her own household duties and sending off her youngest, Moosa Edhi, to school, she is in the nursery at 8am sharp, inquiring from the staff there if everyone had a good sleep, if anyone had any issues during the night. It has become a habit with her to visit the nursery first to inquire about her babies before getting to her other work of calling up the other Edhi Homes and Centres, asking about the other children, their health and school progress, asking about the women in their Homes, tending to the marriage proposals, and adoption procedures and planning outings and picnics for the children. When parents discover their babies are not well, they quietly leave them in our cot, says Sabah Edhi as country celebrates Mothers Day today But today, before she can go inside the nursery, she stops in the playroom to admire three-year-old Fatimas greeting her with a broad smile and a happy dance. Chhoti Mummy hugs the child and gestures to know if she has eaten breakfast. Fatima is deaf and mute. She has only recently been fitted with a cochlear implant, which has enabled her to hear and appreciate music to which she loves to dance. It is quite obvious that Sabahs favourite in the nursery is five-year-old Moosa, named by Mummy, Bilquis Edhi, herself, after her own youngest grandson, Sabah and Faisals youngest son Moosa. But this Moosa, even though he is five, doesnt look more than a year old. His growth is stunted. Sabah lifts him out of his cot and cuddles him lovingly. The nursery only has special children or children with learning disabilities. Moosa was the last child here named by Bilquis Edhi. The rest have been given names by their Chhoti Mummy. There are two newborn baby girls, Aimen and Noor Fatima, peacefully sleeping in their cradles in the cheerful blue nursery. Both the babies are blind. The moment some parents discover that all is not well with their babies they quietly leave them in our cot, says Sabah. They never return for them, she sighs. Parents of very sick children, too, disown them even when they know that their child doesnt have much time to live. We take them in, find them the best of medical care till the last of their breath, she adds. On discovering a child in the cot, we first try to get information about who left him or her there followed by a thorough medical check-up. If they are in need of medical care, we make sure that they receive the best that there is. Just the other day, someone left a little girl suffering from diarrhoea. She had to be hospitalised, she informs. Just then one little girl, of about four years of age, who also looks like she is considerably attached to her Chhoti Mummy walks in and runs up to her. She is normal. There is nothing wrong with this one, Sabah says. She says her name is Manahil. We found her near Sohrab Goth. Most of the children in our Sohrab Goth Centre are much older so I brought her here with me until we can find her parents, she informs. By the grace of God, there is no shortage of space, love and care in this Home built for these children by Edhi Sahab and Mummy, she says, kissing the childs head. All children are a blessing, a priceless gift from God. I wish the parents who discard their children like or neglect them would realise this. I wish such parents could love their special, disabled or sick children like they love their normal children, she says. Sometimes, these very children who they love so much because they are normal and healthy grow up to discard their parents when they are old and weak. Thats the story of so many old people in our homes, she concludes. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Documentary on Dr Aafia Siddiqui launched in Karachi
Description : KARACHI: Aafia Siddiqui  The True Story, a documentary by Friends of Aafia, was launched here at the Karachi Press Club (KPC) on Saturday. The documentary shed light on various aspects of the life of Dr Aafia from her birth, education, marriage and to her kidnapping in Karachi and confinement in a notorious US prison.
View this post on Instagram
Aafias sister Dr Fowzia Siddiqui and Muslim Matters Editor-in-chief Hena Zuberi and others spoke at the event. Dr Fowzia said that her sister Dr Aafia was a gifted child, a bright scholar and a loving and caring person. She got a PhD degree in neurosciences from Brandies University of the US and it was her dream to revolutionise education system in Pakistan. In the documentary, human rights lawyer Clive Stafford Smith, who currently represents Dr Aafia, said a vast majority of the American people had no idea who Dr Aafia was and they also did not care.
He said that she has suffered a lot in the US prison and braved all sorts of torture. El-Hajj Mauri Saalakhan, the founding president and director of operations at The Aafia Foundation, told the documentary makers that after 9/11, the US targeted the human rights and liberties of people, especially Muslims. He said Dr Aafia also fell prey to this victimisation and in 2003 she was kidnapped, along with her children, in Karachi and got disappeared on mere suspicion that her husband had bought online night vision goggles. Umme Muhammad, the president of the Musawemem Campaign, said for the last 15 years she had been linked to the case of Dr Aafia but disappointingly nothing more could be achieved.
She said Dr Aafia was targeted only because she was Muslim. Yvonne Ridley was amongst the first investigative journalists who told the world that Dr Aafia was jailed in Afghanistan. Talking about the grey lady prisoner of Bigram jail, she said in those times the US administration would dehumanise the prisoners and the same was done to Dr Aafia. She was wounded by the US soldiers and in injured condition she was brought to the US and tried by a court in a highly biased manner and jailed for long 86 years, which means the rest of her life. Zeina El-Debis, leader of the Friends of Aafia and founder of the Shade of Mercy Foundation, talked about their efforts to get Dr Aafia repatriated on humanitarian grounds. She said the documentary was also a part of such efforts. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Situationer: Riverine region in the crosshairs of militia violence
Description : DESPITE a year-long anti-dacoit operation in upper Sindhs riverine area, the dacoit factor remains an enigma for the provincial police. The situation took a new turn on May 5 when the Bugtis, allegedly backed by the Punjab police and equipped with military-grade weapons, infiltrated the riverine area of Rwanti in Ghotki, which lies on the Sindh-Punjab border, adding a new layer of complexity to the ongoing operation. The recent incident has once again laid bare the seeming helplessness of the Sindh police, sparking outrage among the provinces intelligentsia. The scourge of dacoits has long plagued parts of northern Sindh, with the governments efforts to eradicate them yielding little success. Despite continued endeavours to tackle the issue, the desired results remain elusive. The Kalpar Bugtis, led by their chief Jalal Kalpar Bugti, claimed to have exacted revenge for the murder of his 30-year-old son, Abdul Rehman Kalpar, by killing two prominent dacoits from the Shar community and injuring half a dozen others. The incident occurred in the Machhko police station area, which falls under the jurisdiction of the Punjab police. The dacoits killed were identified as Alim alias Almo Shar, brother of Sanu Shar, and Hakim alias Haku Shar. Rehman Kalpar was ambushed and killed by dacoits on Feb 13 while he was travelling on the CPEC road in Ghotki district. Jalal Kalpar reached out to the Sindh police, seeking their assistance in avenging his sons murder, according to a senior police officer familiar with the situation. Dacoit issue remains an enigma for Sindh police Jalal Kalpar is unapologetic and straightforward in justifying his actions. I repeatedly reached out to the Ghotki police, but they ignored me. I went to perform Umrah, and upon my return, I was approached by the Punjab police to liaise with them and see how things work, he told Dawn over phone from Sui in Balochistan.
Jalal alleged that Ghotki police SSP Anwar Khetran made excuses, claiming that his force was outgunned by the dacoits, as they only had G-3 and Kalashnikov rifles. However, he added, Mr Khetran did acknowledge that geo-fencing evidence had confirmed the involvement of the Shar community in his sons murder. Punjab police sought help from me in terms of human resource and police would lead the offensive. My men were there as a cover. Finally, Shars were killed in Machko police limits of Punjab. Sindh police didnt do anything in this offence, Jalal alleged. Jalal Kalpar hails from those Bugti families who defied the late Nawab Akbar Bugti and were subsequently displaced from Dera Bugti, settling in Sindh. Following Rehmans killing, Jalal declared at a jirga in Sui that he would hold accountable those responsible, specifically targeting Shaharyar Shar, the chieftain of the Shar clan and a former PTI leader who later joined PPP. In an attempt to defuse the situation, Shar reached out to Jalal to clarify his position and maintain neutrality. Jalal conveyed message to Shaharyar that if Abid Hussain Jatoi, Abid Sundrani, or Gul Mohammad Jakhrani stand surety for him, only then will he talk to him. Only Gul Mohammad agreed, and he, along with Shaharyar, met Kalpar at his Sukkur residence, but names of Rahib Khan Shar and Sana Shar emerged as those responsible for Rehmans murder, a police officer said. Police post as Bugtis base A former SSP of Ghotki said that before the May 5 incident, Bugtis had started arriving in areas along the Sindh-Punjab border. They [Bugtis] wanted Bhaya-4 police post vacated by Sindh police. This post is manned by Ghotki police, but the area falls in Punjabs territorial limits. As they wanted to use this post as their operational base, but didnt find Ghotki police forthcoming in their response, so they turned to Punjab police eventually, said the officer. According to him, the Punjab police permitted the Bugtis to utilise the Camp-2 location, which was situated approximately 800 metres from Sanu Shars hideout. Its an ideal location from which they can confront the Shars comfortably, the officer added. Viral video images revealed that the Bugtis, armed with prohibited and military-grade weapons, disembarked from APCs in the katcha area. The ensuing gun battle, which lasted a couple of days, resulted in the deaths of two Shars and injuries to several others. The Bugtis then departed. According to a former SSP of Shikarpur, the military-grade weapons used were of 82mm dimension, a type commonly seen in Afghanistan. Dangerous precedent Professor Inam Shaikh, an analyst, says, The incident has set a dangerous precedent. He urges the Supreme Court to take suo motu notice. How can state collaborate with private persons? It amounts to creating private militia which otherwise means civil war. Supreme Court must step in to take action against police authorities and criminals for this illegal act, he insists. Naseer Memon, a writer, has analysed the situation from the perspective of good dacoits, bad dacoits and the economy of the katcha area. The recent episode of allowing one tribe to attack another in the katcha area can snowball this crime into a tribal warfare. This can flare up a bloodbath, he says. He believes that a multi-stakeholder economy, operating behind the scenes, drives the dacoits, kidnapping, and ransom industry in upper Sindh. A police official reveals that Rahib Shar has been primarily responsible for the kidnapping of people on the CPEC road and other areas. Meanwhile, Sanu Shar has been running a honey trap industry in the riverine area. According to another police officer, Rahib Shar is residing in Sindhs riverine area, while Sanu Shar is based in Punjabs limits. Actually, there is a strip of riverine land stretching over around 3-4km that falls in Sindh but administratively looked after by Rahim Yar Khan administration. Since Punjab police dont pay heed to this area much and Sindh police also remain inactive, it has become a sort of no mans land and a safe haven for outlaws, claims an SSP from lower Sindh. Bugtis aim to target Shars as a community, while the actual culprits, Rahib Shar and Sanu Shar, remain out of their reach. After the July 28, 2023, killing of notorious dacoits Janu Indher, Soomar Shar, Shahzado Dashti, Nazar Mohammad alias Nazroo alias Kato Shar, and Mubashir alias Mushir Indhar, the Sindh police chief was initially reluctant to take a position. However, the Sindh police later claimed credit for the operation. Meanwhile, the Punjab police also staked their claim. Nevertheless, the Sindh police asserted their right to the head money of Rs8.5 million fixed by the government against Janu, Soomar, and Shahzado. After the Bugtis onslaught on the Shars, Sanu Shar uploaded a video clarifying that he was not involved in Rehmans murder. However, this failed to appease Jalal Kalpar, who has temporarily withdrawn from the area but remains resolute in his vow to take on the Shars until Rehmans murderers are killed. I have no issues with Sindh or the Sindhi people, nor did I have any enmity with the Shars as a community. It is the Ganderi Shars, specifically Sannu, Moriyo, Jamal, and Rahib, who are responsible for my sons murder. So, my quest for vengeance is far from over, he declared. Despite repeated messages and calls, Ghotki SSP Sumair Noor Channa remained unavailable to explain whether criminal cases have been lodged in this regard. Similarly, Rahim Yar Khan SSP Rizwan Gondal did not reply to questions about how Punjab police are backing private militias to take on outlaws. A message was also sent to Sindh IG Ghulam Nabi Memon to get his side of the story, but no contact could be established with him. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Pakistans iCube-Qamar beams back first images from moons orbit
Description : Pakistans inaugural lunar satellite iCube-Qamar on Friday transmitted the first-ever images captured by it from the lunar orbit, the national space agency said. The satellite, part of Chinas Change-6 lunar mission, was launched from the Hainan province on May 3 and had successfully entered the moons orbit at 1:14pm on May 8. The moon is at an average distance of 384,400km from earth. The lunar module was designed by Islamabads Institute of Space Technology (IST) in collaboration with Chinas Shanghai University (SJTU) and Pakistans national space agency Suparco. The landmark images were unveiled at a ceremony organised at the China National Space Agency (CNSA) to mark the successful mission accomplishment, IST spokesperson and head of Department of Electrical and Computer Science, Dr Khurram Khursheed told Dawn.com. They were officially handed over to Pakistans ambassador to Beijing, she added.
View this post on Instagram
One of the first-ever images captured by Pakistans inaugural lunar satellite iCube-Qamar shows the moon and the sun.   Suparco/CNSA
The iCube-Q orbiter carries two optical cameras to image the lunar surface. The module is a cube satellite or cubesat  miniature satellites typically characterised by their small size and standardized cubic design. Due to their compact size and relatively low cost compared to traditional satellites, CubeSats offered opportunities for universities, research institutions and commercial entities to participate in space missions and gather valuable data for scientific advancement and innovation. Operating in extreme temperatures as low as minus 100 degrees Celsius, the satellite features a 7-kilogramme one-megapixel camera tailored for missions with power constraints.
Dr Khursheed had said the satellite would play a critical role in deep space missions. Its surface-level analysis capabilities, transmitting images at a modest 1-kbps, will provide crucial data on crater locations, water, and traces of ice on the moons surface, he had said. As the Chinese lander collects rock and soil samples, iCube-Q will spend three to six months orbiting the moon, capturing and transmitting images of the moon back to Earth. The IST said the opportunity to release the cubesat in lunar orbit from the Change-6 mission was offered by the CNSA through the Asia Pacific Space Cooperation Organisation (Apsco). After a thorough evaluation, Pakistans proposal was accepted out of all Apsco member states.
One of the first-ever images captured by Pakistans inaugural lunar satellite iCube-Qamar shows the sun shining brightly.   Suparco/CNSA
The Change-6 mission, which aims to explore the moons dark side, employs lunar research payloads from multiple countries, including Pakistans iCube-Qamar satellite. The mission is named after the mythical Chinese moon goddess. Nasa is banned by US law from any collaboration, direct or indirect, with China. On Change-6, China is carrying payloads from France, Italy, Sweden and Pakistan, while Change-7 will bear payloads from Russia, Switzerland and Thailand when it launches in 2026.
Change-6 aims to collect around 2kg of lunar samples from the far side of the Moon and bring them back to Earth for analysis. Chinese state news agency Xinhua had hailed it as the first endeavour of its kind in the history of human lunar exploration. China will send a robotic spacecraft in the coming days on a round trip to the moons far side in the first of three technically demanding missions that will pave the way for an inaugural Chinese crewed landing and a base on the lunar south pole. The probe is set to land in the immense South Pole-Aitken Basin, one of the largest known impact craters in the solar system. Once there, it will scoop up lunar soil and rocks, and carry out other experiments in the landing zone. With no direct line of sight with the Earth, Change-6 must rely on a recently deployed relay satellite orbiting the moon during its 53-day mission, including a never-before-attempted ascent from the moons hidden side on its return journey home. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Ruling coalition loses 27 reserved seats in Punjab
Description :  Speaker suspends PML-Ns 23, PPPs two, and one member each of PML-Q, IPP
 Decision announced on point of order raised by PTI-backed SIC leader
 In National Assembly, ruling coalition also likely to lose 23 seats ahead of budget session LAHORE / ISLAMABAD: The ruling coalition in Punjab led by PML-N on Friday lost dozens of reserved seats in the provincial assembly when the speaker suspended 24 women and three minority MPAs elected on reserved seats and barred them from joining the house proceedings. Twenty-three of the suspended MPAs belonged to PML-N, two to PPP and one each to PML-Q and IPP. Speaker Malik Mohammad Ahmed Khan took the decision on a point of order raised a day ago by opposition lawmaker Rana Aftab of PTI-backed Sunni Ittehad Council (SIC) during the house proceedings. The opposition member had argued that the Supreme Court had suspended the decision of the Election Commission of Pakistan (ECP) of allocating the reserved seats of SIC to other parties on the plea that the SIC had neither contested elections nor had submitted a list of nominees for the seats reserved for women and minorities. But Speaker Khan ruled that he had sought opinions of the advocate general as well as the provincial law department and would take a decision only on receiving their reports. Soon after the beginning of house proceedings on Friday, the speaker read out the Supreme Court order and gave the ruling that Rana Aftabs point of order was lawful and suspended the 27 members immediately. When Mr Aftab pointed out that the suspended MPAs had unlawfully voted for the resolution condemning May 9 violence, the chair said he should have raised the issue when the resolution had been put to vote a day ago. The women MPAs suspended were Maqsoodan Bibi, Rubina Nazir, Salma Zahid, Kanwal Nauman, Zeba Ghafoor, Saeeda Samreen Taj, Sheharbano, Amna Parveen, Syed Sumera Ahmed, Uzma Butt, Afshan Hussain, Shagufta Faisal, Nasreen Riaz, Sajida Naveed, Farzana Abbas, Mariya Talal, Tasheen Fawad, Abida Bashir, Saeeda Muzaffar, Faiza Monima, Amera Khan, Samiya Ata, Rahat Afza and Rukhsana Shafiq. The minority MPAs were Tariq Masih Gill, Waseem Anjum, and Basroji. National Assembly After the Supreme Courts decision and the Punjab Assembly speakers action, the ruling coalition in the National Assembly is also set to lose nearly two dozen members ahead of the crucial budget session. President Asif Ali Zardari on Friday summoned the National Assembly session on Monday (May 13) and the SIC members are expected to seek a similar ruling from Speaker Ayaz Sadiq. After allocating reserved seats to the parties in the NA in proportion to the general seats won by them in the Feb 8 elections, the Election Commission of Pakistan (ECP) had withheld the notifications on 23 reserved seats  20 for women and three for minorities  due to the dispute on the allocation of the seats after the decision of the PTI-backed independents to join the SIC. Later, the ECP refused to allocate these seats to the SIC and issued notifications distributing these seats to the parties in the ruling coalition headed by the PML-N. The ECP allocated 15 seats reserved for women to the PML-N, four to PPP and one to the JUI-F. It allocated one seat each reserved for the minorities to the PML-N, the PPP and the MQM-P. As a result, PML-N became the largest party in the NA with 123 seats whereas the tallies of PPP and the JUI-F rose to 73 and 11, respectively. The ECP had also issued notifications on the reserved seats for women and minorities in Punjab and the KP assemblies the same day. The PML-N had initially won a total of 75 general seats and was joined by nine independents. With the allocation of 19 reserved seats for women and four reserved seats for minorities, the number reached 107. However, after the March 5 notifications, the PML-N had been allocated 15 out of the remaining 20 reserved seats for women and one out of the three remaining seats reserved for minorities, taking the partys tally to 123 seats. Likewise, PPP had won 54 general seats and was allocated 12 seats reserved for women and two for minorities. After the allocation of four more seats reserved for women and one for minorities on March 5, the number of the PPP lawmakers is now 73, still fewer than the PTI-backed independents who had joined the SIC hoping to get reserved seats. The MQM-Pakistan has 22 members in the National Assembly, while the number of JUI-F lawmakers had gone up to 11 from seven. The SC decision is expected to have no effect in the composition of the Balochistan Assembly as PTI had not won any seat in the province in the Feb 8 polls. However, in the provincial assembly of Sindh, the two reserved seats for women were given to PPP from the share of the PTI-SIC, which had nine members. KP Assembly The most interesting distribution of reserved seats had been observed in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Assembly, where the PTI-backed independents had won 91 seats compared to just 19 seats secured by all other political parties combined. However, the JUI-F, which could get only seven general seats to stay on top among these political parties, was allocated 10 reserved seats for women. Likewise, the PML-N, which won six general seats, was given eight reserved seats. The PPP, which bagged four general seats, was allocated six reserved seats. The ANP and the PTI-P, which clinched one general seat each, also remained lucky to have their numbers double in the provincial assembly. However, these MPAs in KP Assembly have not yet taken oath as the speaker has refused to call the session. Gwadar killings Meanwhile, the Punjab Assembly during its Fridays sitting adopted a resolution condemning the recent killing of 11 workers belonging to Punjab in Gwadar. The resolution presented by treasury members Amjad Ali Javed demanded the federal government arrest the culprits. It also demanded that the centre announce a compensation package for the heirs of the deceased. South Punjab On a point of order raised by opposition MPA Nadeem Qureshi, Punjab Finance Minister Mujtaba Shuja told the house that the south Punjab secretariat was not being wrapped up; rather the officers who had been promoted were being replaced by new appointments. The minister also rejected the stance that the PML-N was against the development of south Punjab and said that the region had been developed the most when incumbent Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif was the chief minister of Punjab. Published in Dawn, May 11th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : PIA staff forgets to put boys body on plane
Description :
SKARDU: Officials of PIA, the Civil Aviation Authority and police try to placate the protesting father of the deceased.Photo by the writer
GILGIT: In a heart-wrenching incident, a PIA flight from Islamabad to Skardu left behind the body of a six-year-old boy at the capitals airport on Friday, while his parents continued their journey, unaware of the shocking mistake. The parents of the deceased boy were shocked and fainted at Skardu airport when they came to know that their sons body had been left behind in Islamabad. Mujtaba, a resident of Katshi village of Kharmang district, was diagnosed with a tumour at a hospital in Skardu and doctors referred him to Rawalpindi for treatment a month ago. His father Muhammad Askari and mother took him to Rawalpindi and he had been under treatment at Benazir Bhutto Hospital for weeks. Mujtaba lost his life in the hospital on Thursday. The parents decided to transport the body of their child to their native village of Katshi for burial, through a PIA flight on Friday, as a 24-hour-long journey from Islamabad to Skardu by road with the body was not possible due to hot weather. Shocked parents, relatives protest against airline managements negligence at Skardu airport The deceased boys parents and another relative confirmed their tickets at flight PK-451 from Islamabad to Skardu on Friday morning. They brought the body to Islamabad airport at 6am and completed cargo procedure for the body after fulfilling SOPs and airlines rules and made the payment. Ibrahim Asadi, a relative of the deceased boy, told Dawn that the body was scheduled to be transported with the parents to Skardu from Islamabad at 9am. He said the flight was delayed for four hours and left Islamabad at 1pm. Upon arrival at Skardu airport at 2pm, the parents were informed that mistakenly the body was not loaded on the plane and left behind at Islamabad airport. The news sparked grief and outrage as parents were shocked and started crying while the boys mother and father fainted at the airport. The relatives of the boy waiting to receive the body also gathered at the airports lounge and started protest against the PIA managements negligence. It continued for three hours. Officials of PIA, Civil Aviation Authority and other departments, who were on duty at Skardu airport, tried to calm down the boys parents and relatives and admitted their mistake. They assured the parents of bringing back the body on Saturday (today). The PIA officials said the company, which handles cargos at the airport, is responsible for not loading the body and assured the parents that action would be taken against it for negligence. The boys parents and relatives chanted slogans against the PIA administration. They said the poor family had paid higher price to transport the body through the PIA flight, but the airline committed a serious negligence. They appealed to the government to take action against those responsible for the negligence. Yousaf Kamal, another relative of the deceased boy, said the body had deliberately not been loaded on the plane. He said Minister for Kashmir Affairs and Gilgit-Baltistan Engr Amir Muqam was scheduled to fly to Gilgit from Islamabad on Friday, adding that the PIA flight from Islamabad to Gilgit couldnt operate due to the bad weather condition. He said the federal minister had changed his plan and decided to go to Skardu and kept the passengers waiting. He said the flight was scheduled to depart from Islamabad at 9am, but was delayed till 1pm to accommodate the minister, leaving the body behind at the airport. Published in Dawn, May 11th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Pakistan remain unbeaten in Azlan Shah Cup as match with New Zealand ends in tie
Description : Pakistan on Friday secured a tie in their match against New Zealand in the 30th Azlan Shah Hockey Cup. Pakistans fifth match today, which was played in Malaysias Ipoh city at 1pm (PKT), saw them remain unbeaten throughout the tournament. The match ended in a draw, with both teams securing one point each, the Pakistan Hockey Federation (PHF) said.
View this post on Instagram
Senior player Ammad Shakeel is leading the 18-member squad with Abu Bakr as the vice-captain. Japan lead the points table with 13 points while Pakistan rank second with 11 points. New Zealand hold the third position with seven points while Malaysia follow them with a point less.
View this post on Instagram
According to the PHF, both Pakistan and New Zealand had not scored by half-time. New Zealand then succeeded in scoring a field goal in the 35th minute of the game. However, Abu Bakr amassed a goal for Pakistan in the 43rd minute while playing at the penalty corner. Pakistan and Japan had already qualified for the final match, which will take place at 5:30pm (PKT) on Saturday at the Azlan Shah Stadium in Ipoh, after winning their respective matches on Wednesday. Pakistan had defeated Canada 5-4 while Japan beat hosts Malaysia 2-1. According to Radio Pakistan, Pakistan have won their three matches against Malaysia, South Korea and Canada while the ones against Japan and New Zealand ended in a draw. Meanwhile, after their 3-1 victory against Canada today, Japan have four wins plus a draw. Earlier this month, head coach Roelant Oltmans had said he expected an improved show by Pakistan in the tournament. Oltmans, 69, has served Pakistans senior and junior teams in different roles since 2004 and was involved with the youth side in his most recent stint. Pakistan won the Azlan Shah Cup title thrice  in 1999, 2000 and 2003  and came third in the last edition which was also held in Ipoh in 2022. Malaysia are the defending champions of this years edition. Addressing the squad via video link, Information Minister Attaullah Tarar reiterated the governments commitment to hockey while also mentioning a campaign across all forms of media to highlight the teams achievements in the Azlan Shah Cup, according to a report from state-run Radio Pakistan. He added that the prime minister would focus on removing obstacles in the development of hockey in Pakistan. Tara said final would be broadcast nationwide tomorrow on Saturday and wished the team luck. The entire nation is praying for the victory of Pakistan and is looking forward to welcome a champion team. Rana Mashood Ahmed, chairman of the Prime Ministers Youth Programme, also congratulated the team for reaching the final after thirteen years. He added that Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif would also host the team on its return and address issues impeding hockeys development in the country. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Who can rock the hybrid boat?
Description : A NUMBER of developments over the past week suggest that the establishment is keen to enforce/ maintain the status quo and the only impediment in its path may be an assertive superior judiciary that has been increasingly finding its feet in recent weeks. If jailed PTI leader and former prime minister Imran Khans article in UKs conservative right-wing Telegraph newspaper blaming the military leadership directly for all his woes the week before was not hint enough of the state of play, two public statements by the latter clarified issues rather unambiguously. The first came in the DG ISPRs press briefing, which was ostensibly called to discuss Afghanistan-based terrorist groups involvement in attacks on Chinese nationals working on development projects in the country. But in response to a couple of questions about the PTI and Imran Khan related to the events of May 9 last year, the DG ISPR stated unequivocally that the only path to rehabilitation for the political party and its leaders was to seek forgiveness for attacking your own forces.
Then, perhaps, talks could happen and that too with political parties (ie, the government), as the military had nothing to do with politics. Imran Khan has been consistent in saying he wouldnt talk to the powerless political parties and that a meaningful dialogue is possible only with the military. The DG ISPR also lamented the delay in the prosecution and sentencing of all those responsible for the May mayhem  including the leaders and mastermind against whom irrefutable evidence has been gathered and submitted  and, in doing so, appeared to hint at the establishments frustrations with what it perceives as roadblocks being erected by the judiciary. The content of the live presser evoked an equally adamant response from the PTI, which went on the offensive, reiterating its stance that May 9 was a false flag operation, accusing the militarys spokesman of being economical with the truth, and saying it would be happy to live with the findings of an impartial judicial commission into the May 9 events and would even apologise if found to be at fault. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. The military spokesman had pre-empted this demand in his briefing earlier by saying if a probe were to happen, as was being demanded, it ought to start with 2014, and not nine years later. The 2014 PTI sit-in in the federal capital was said to have been instigated and backed by the then ISI chief. This was the first indication that the military was prepared to hold its own accountable for past follies, if it paved the way for the trials and sentencing of PTI leaders it says were responsible for the attacks on defence installations in a number of cities in Punjab and KP. While the spokesman left nothing to the imagination, on the first anniversary of May 9, the army chief added his voice to his chief spokesmans in terms of stressing the need for punishing the perpetrators of the violence a year earlier, also lashing out against what he called digital terrorism.
This indicates that harsher curbs on social media are planned. So far, the PTI has had overwhelming social media dominance and had been able to keep a step ahead of its adversaries, but we will find out soon whether it has what it takes to bypass software the Chinese have developed over the years (and Pakistan has reportedly acquired) and successfully used to block dissident content. With this ever-widening gulf between the establishment and the party it once saw as a panacea for all that ails Pakistan, the one thing that many felt could force a rethink in the establishment would have been a public manifestation of the immense support enjoyed by the PTI, as evidenced in last Februarys elections. Many Pakistan watchers keenly waited all day for multitudes of PTI supporters to spill out onto the roads and streets of major urban conurbations on the party leaders call to break the shackles and protest on May 9. But the brutal crackdown of the past one year seems to have knocked the wind out of the partys sails and worn down the workers will. People may turn out to vote for it in droves, but did not appear prepared to risk life, limb and liberty in coming out for mass protests. Some small localised protests did happen, but had zero impact in the sense of influencing decision-making in the corridors of power. Going forward, a couple of factors will play a role in steering developments. The first and foremost will be the confidence the army chief has in his control over his institution. His predecessor appointed a dozen major generals to three stars in his final six weeks in office and left the incumbent little room in terms of forming his own team. Natural attrition and the more dramatic exit of a couple of three stars on disciplinary grounds recently has, 18 months down the line, given the chief an opportunity to place senior officers of his own choosing in key roles which will give him greater freedom of action both inside and outside the institution. The promotion of three officers this week, including the DG ISPR, to three stars was another step in that direction. The military saw May 9 as a coup against the chief, a failed attempt to dislodge him from office. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. With the PTI protests failing to gather momentum, the only impediment in his path seems to be an increasingly assertive superior judiciary. It can and will, in all likelihood, challenge the establishments pre-eminence in decision-making. It isnt clear how the latter plans to deal with that, especially because it believes that a direly needed economic revival is only possible under the umbrella of a hybrid set-up and in a relatively calm political environment. Only the judiciary can rock its boat now. The writer is a former editor of Dawn. abbas.nasir@hotmail.com Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Insurgency and social change
Description : THE recent killing of seven barbershop workers from Punjab in Gwadar is another indicator that the insurgency in Balochistan is evolving and intensifying demographic changes, which will impact the sociopolitical landscape of the province. Although targeted killings of settlers in Balochistan are not a new trend, the emergence of the Balochistan Liberation Army as the primary insurgent group has significantly increased operational capacities and diversified targets.
While the BLA has not officially claimed responsibility for the Gwadar attack, it is likely the act of one of its wings or affiliate groups. Last month, the group carried out a significant attack, killing nine people from central Punjab who were planning on reaching Europe through Iran. Based on their ethnicity, BLA gunmen abducted them from a bus bound for Taftan and later dumped their bodies under a bridge in a hilly area of Noshki. In a similar attack, possibly by the same gunmen, two people were killed when they tried to escape the assailants cordon on N-40, the Quetta-Noshki highway. Following the Noshki attack, the BLA issued a statement claiming that its special squad had killed agents of Pakistans intelligence agencies who, they claimed, were travelling in plain clothes on the bus. However, media reports and investigations later revealed that the victims were using the Balochistan route to travel to Iran and onward to Europe. Baloch militants view workers and travellers from Punjab as collaborators or agents of security forces or the federal government. Attacks targeting Punjabi workers and settlers have occurred in various parts of the province in the past. It appears that the insurgents kill settlers because they are non-combatants and, as such, easy targets. Militant groups assign such tasks to their new recruits to test their conviction and draw them into the cycle of violence. While one can comprehend Baloch grievances against the state institutions and Punjab, it is also crucial to understand why they target non-combatants who have been serving them for years. Whenever anger flares against the states flawed policies, settlers become the targets. Traditionally, Baloch society has a few key professions. Hairdressing is one of the major ones they miss. Teaching comes next, with teachers from Punjab and the Urdu-speaking community making significant contributions to the education sector in the province. Like tribal codes in other parts of the country, the Baloch follow the tradition of hosting members of different ethnicities without integrating them into their tribal ethics. This is a common practice, as assimilation is a long process. The same applies to settlers from Punjab and urban Sindh, who have embraced the norms of Baloch society, while maintaining ties with their native towns and communities.
However, Punjabis constitute the largest ethnic group in the country and wield significant power and resources, leading to resentment not only among the Baloch, but also Pakhtuns and Sindhis. Whenever anger flares against the establishment and the states flawed policies, settlers become the targets of this animosity. Historically, barbers have been the first victims when such hatred triggers violence. It is worth noting that many of these barbers hail from southern Punjab, much of which identifies itself as Baloch, but their official domicile determines their identity and ethnicity. Over the last two decades, Pakhtuns have captured market businesses in urban Balochistan, while Sindhis have gradually become prominent in the labour market. Despite issues of ethnic and tribal pride and sociocultural differences, there has been no hostility towards these communities. This is because both ethnicities are part of Balochistan and share some cultural commonalities. Moreover, both communities have faced major hostility, apart from minor issues related to ethnic and tribal pride and sociocultural differences. The reasons are that both ethnicities are part of Balochistan and share few other cultural commonalities, but both are also seen as deprived communities and, in the past, have remained part of the political struggle for rights. Insurgencies have no room for neutrality or ambiguity, as insurgents seek clear distinctions between friends and foes. In places like Myanmar and India, ethnic insurgents target civilians from minority ethnic groups, as well as engage in property destruction and other abuses. While small ethnic groups may strive to maintain a neutral stance, they often find themselves between insurgents and counterinsurgents in grey areas. This dynamic is evident among Pakhtuns and Sindhis, who have been targeted by insurgents while working on government projects. The contractors had hired them as an alternative to Punjabi labour, but they were not spared despite a sense of affinity with them.
Sociopolitical transformation is a complex phenomenon, which is influenced not only by insurgents but also by internal societal changes. Baloch society is transforming due to rural-to-urban migration, increasing literacy rates, and improved connectivity. Similar to Karachis experience, urbanisation in Quetta is making other major urban centres multi-ethnic too. Despite ethnic bonds with Sindhis, coexistence with Pakhtuns and Sindhis may face occasional challenges. Additionally, religion presents a growing challenge, as religious fervour increases alongside literacy rates among the Baloch. While this may appear advantageous for state institutions seeking cohesion through religion, religiosity has not weakened Balochistans nationalistic sentiments. The promotion of religious organisations and madressahs by state institutions has failed to make a significant impact, mainly due to the vast disparities within Baloch societys tribal, rural, and urban composition, which foster diverse political interests. The very forces undermining peace are now major power players. At the national level, the provinces poor human development and governance indicators leave ample space for resistance politics. Sociopolitical changes often trigger paradoxical sentiments, with simultaneous pro-development and anti-development attitudes emerging. When the sense of deprivation intensifies, and resource distribution becomes contentious, it creates a conducive environment for militants to recruit, expand, and diversify their targets and tactics. Targeting non-combatants of the majority group reflects a deepening societal anger at this level. This is the most crucial level, as the state has to rethink and correct its approach towards Balochistan. The writer is a security analyst. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : The net metering dead end
Description : LETS start with putting a couple of undue misapprehensions to rest. I have had the opportunity of interacting with key decision-makers in the power bureaucracy and they assure me of two things. First, solar panels installed in peoples homes are not going to be taxed. Second, the net metering rate at which power utilities buy electricity back from consumers is not going to be revised downward for those who already have their system up and running. They emphasise that changes are being considered in the net metering regulations of 2015, with a view to reducing the amount people receive for the power their systems pump into the grid, but that those with existing systems will not be impacted. Lets hope they will keep their word, because breaking covenants is becoming far too routine for the government of Pakistan. Assuming that they will keep their word with existing customers, there is another problem of a more general but critical nature. The government of Pakistan seems to no longer be able to afford the solar revolution sweeping across the world. This is somewhat striking, since the whole idea of the renewable revolution is to make electricity more affordable and cleaner and many countries have set targets for themselves on how much of their power should come from renewable sources like solar. For example, in 2010, the worlds total installed solar power generation capacity was less than 42GW, according to Our World in Data. By 2022, this had risen to 1,053GW. This is one of the fastest rates of growth for a new power source. What is even more striking than these two data points is the slope of the graph along the way, which shows continuous acceleration year after year. Rooftop solar has dominated this growth, although some estimates are suggesting that utility-scale solar may start to overtake rooftop in a few years in some critical regions, like the European Union. But these trends apart, rooftop solar has dominated the rise, and for most countries, it has been the main driving force in their solar expansion and plans to meet net zero targets. Power bureaucracies need to adapt to, facilitate and spur on the solar revolution. Here in Pakistan, something has happened that others have experienced too, but they found innovative solutions rather than trying to suppress the growth of rooftop solar. Pakistan had targeted 1,920MW of rooftop solar capacity by the year 2026, according to its latest Indicative Generation Capacity Expansion Plan. In reality, we crossed that threshold in 2023, if not sooner. Now they want to apply the brakes, because, according to the power bureaucracy, this rapid growth in rooftop solar is creating costs that have to be passed on to poorer segments of the population, who dont have the luxury (yet) to go the rooftop solar route because they have single-phase meters and the technology does not yet work with that. Additionally, they have very limited rooftop space they can use for the purpose. The big problem in Pakistans power bureaucracy now is that the state insists on setting the price of electricity manually, using outmoded formulae. In large-scale thermal power plants, for example, they still use what is called cost plus pricing, where the regulator actually looks at each cost item in the prospective power plant and decides what their total costs are and how much margin they should be allowed. This is partly because nobody is willing to invest in Pakistan on a large scale if their returns are not guaranteed. And the big reason for that is the government of Pakistan has a lousy reputation when it comes to delivering on its commitments. Meanwhile, the way in which electricity is produced has evolved and changed rapidly from the time this cost plus pricing formula was developed. Back then, we had a few large-scale power plants supply electricity to a single buyer  the government  which transmitted this power to various distribution companies, all state owned, who then sold it on to a list of metered customers. The solar revolution has changed all that. Now we have what is called distributed generation or point of sale consumption, where electricity is produced in a large and growing number of locations, and often consumed then and there. Along with this shift has come a new category of consumers and producers of electricity, called prosumers  people who produce and consume electricity themselves. The old pricing formulae are not going to work in a world of prosumers. Here is what seems to be going wrong in the power bureaucracy with this move to bring down net metering rates, and perhaps switch to what they call gross metering for all categories, although it seems the details are still being worked out. Whats wrong with all this is that it aims to protect the bureaucracy from the disruptive impact of a new technology that is spreading rapidly around the world, and changing how power sectors are organised. Imagine, in the early 2000s, if the bureaucracy had moved to protect the Pakistan Telecommunication Corporation from the disruptive impact of mobile phones. Imagine if they made the argument that this new technology was being used by elites, who were opting out of the PTC system, leaving the rest to carry the costs of the state-owned telecom infrastructure. Imagine if the state gave in to their arguments, and moved to heavily tax handsets and talk time and priced the new technology out of the market. Where would we be today? Something similar, perhaps not identical, is happening today with solar and other renewable power generation technology. Power bureaucracies need to adapt to, facilitate and spur on this revolution and increase the speed of its adoption. The key change begins with pricing and then the single buyer model, allowing power generators to sell to their customers directly instead of through the state. Instead, they seem more concerned with protecting the financial health of their bureaucracy in the face of this revolution. The writer is a business and economy journalist. khurram.husain@gmail.com X: @khurramhusain Published in Dawn, May 9th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : An inclusive judiciary
Description : ACCORDING to media reports, a recent meeting of the Judicial Commission of Pakistan (JCP) was adjourned without finalising changes in its rules. This was because the law minister informed the members that the federal government was considering amending the Constitution to revise the appointment process of high court and Supreme Court (SC) judges. The government has thus far not revealed details of its proposed amendments. Some indication of possible reform can be found in the PML-Ns manifesto, which provides for an inclusive procedure for appointment of Superior Court Judges on merit. The PPPs manifesto recognises the importance of diversity, and promises to increase representation for women, minorities, and underrepresented segments of society in the judiciary. The PTIs manifesto makes similar commitments regarding making the judiciary more inclusive and the process of appointments more transparent. Importantly, the committee constituted in December 2023 to review the Judicial Commission Rules, 2010, also listed diversity as one of the key areas that required consideration. The major parties and courts agree there is need for reform in the appointments process. It appears, therefore, that the major political parties and the courts agree there is need for reform in the appointments process to make it more inclusive and the judiciary more diverse. Specifically, a number of reforms will be required to achieve this objective. The first issue that needs to be addressed is that of framing. Often, inclusion and diversity are considered contrary to the idea of merit, and are reduced merely to tokenism and tick-box exercises. This perception must be strongly challenged. The inclusion of women as well as other marginalised groups in the administration of justice is a cross-cutting issue, with implications for the credibility and legitimacy of the justice system in larger society. It should be seen as an objective in itself as well as an essential pre-condition for the effective protection of human rights and substantive equality. It is now recognised that diversity is not an optional extra but a basic component of the judiciarys ability to do its job. And that diversity and inclusion should be considered a part of merit and not in opposition to it. This is why a number of constitutions recognise the importance of diversity in the judiciary  specifically, greater inclusion of women  but also consideration for religious, racial and other factors, depending on the context. Any amendments to the process of judicial appointments, therefore, should expressly provide for the equal representation of women, inclusion and diversity as objectives of the judicial appointments process. Second, the composition of the JCP needs amendment. Currently, it comprises the chief justice of Pakistan, four most senior judges of the SC, one former judge of the SC, the federal law and justice minister, the attorney general of Pakistan, and a senior SC advocate. When the JCP is considering appointments for the high courts, it includes four additional members. At present, all members of the JCP are men. This is not accidental, but a consequence of the larger exclusion of women from the top echelons of the legal profession in the country. Its composition also suffers from lack of diversity and inclusion of members who are not from the judiciary or the bar. This absence has an adverse impact on the JCPs credibility and is not sustainable. Article 175A of the Constitution should, therefore, be amended to make the JCP more diverse, and also aim to ensure that its composition broadly reflects that of larger society in terms of gender, ethnicity, religious groups, and regional balance. Third, there is currently an absence of any criteria for appointments to the SC and high courts. The Constitution only stipulates the requirement of age, citizenship, and minimum professional experience. The Judicial Commission Rules are also completely silent on the criteria on which the JCP nominates or assesses candidates. The lack of transparent and public criteria on which judicial appointments are made is incompatible with international standards and best practices on judicial appointments. Changes in the judicial appointments process should, therefore, include criteria on which candidates are considered for recommendation, and give due consideration to the need for the progressive attainment of gender equity and the removal of other historic factors of discrimination and marginalisation. The fourth issue that also has an impact on inclusion and diversity is how nominations are initiated. At present, chief justices have the sole power of initiation; ie, it is only the chief justice of the relevant court who can recommend names of candidates, who are then considered by the JCP for nominations to the parliamentary committee. This power has dubious roots, creates an unnecessary hierarchy within the JCP, and has led to the perception of misuse. In a number of jurisdictions, including the UK and South Africa, the bodies empowered to make judicial appointments invite interested candidates to apply to be considered for appointment to the Supreme Court. This model opens up the judicial appointments process, allows a more diverse range of eligible candidates to apply, and eliminates any bias, real or perceived, in the initiation stage. The government should, therefore, consider making provision for the JCP inviting applications for vacancies in the high courts and SC. The fifth area that needs reform is lack of transparency. At present, the deliberations and proceedings of the JCP are secret and opaque. The public has no information about why certain candidates are chosen for consideration and on what basis candidates are selected for nomination. In the larger context of discriminatory practices and attitudes against women and other marginalised groups, such secrecy often works to their detriment and leads to the perception of bias in the appointments process. While the detailed deliberations of the JCP need not be made public, the reasons for selecting certain candidates for nomination must be disclosed. Most importantly, perhaps, the governments reform package must take into consideration input from a broad range of stakeholders. Opaque and hasty attempts at such far-reaching legislation that are not consultative would defeat the very objectives of transparency, merit, and inclusion such reform claims to achieve. The writer is a legal adviser for the International Commission of Jurists. reema.omer@icj.org X: reema_omer Published in Dawn, May 11th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Street safety
Description : THE Sindh chief executives resolve to address street crime is encouraging. This commitment raises important questions: are these crimes organised or opportunistic? Can traditional policing strategies alone be effective, or is a blend of conventional and technological methods required? How important is educating the public on safety measures for the prevention of street crime? Also, one must consider whether street crime is predominantly an urban or rural phenomenon. Street crimes typically include the snatching of mobile phones, cash, and motorcycles by individuals aged between 18 and 35. The environment, such as street lighting, architectural designs, and administrative practices, also plays a significant role in these incidents. Although initially appearing to be opportunistic, these crimes are increasingly becoming organised, driven by environmental and situational factors. They usually occur in densely populated and economically disadvantaged areas, particularly where there is minimal surveillance, such as lack of CCTV, private security, and alarm systems. Several factors contribute to the rise in street crime, including high unemployment rates, poverty, easy access to small arms, a low criminal conviction rate, enticing high-value items, insufficient police presence, low CCTV coverage, weak police-community collaboration, and limited public knowledge on safety practices. Hiring unverified labourers and domestic workers in urban areas like Karachi also plays a role. The psychological impact is significant, leading to increased feelings of insecurity and a rise in mental health issues among residents. Recent reports indicate a significant surge in street crime in Karachi, with daily occurrences of theft and violence. However, lengthy processes and low trust between police and the public often prevent victims from reporting crimes. Streamlining the process for registering FIRs could enhance public trust and provide more accurate crime data. Karachi Police, with a force of 44,000 personnel, dedicates only 13,500 to patrol duties, with the remainder assigned to non-patrol roles. This distribution poses challenges in effectively managing street crime, as traditional policing methods often result in unsuccessful investigations. Karachis unchecked demographic changes have led to the unregulated growth of slums, necessitating the establishment of a Slums Regulatory Authority to oversee these areas and ensure proper integration of newcomers from other cities with collaboration between union councils, police, and Nadra. To effectively prevent crime such as auto theft and ATM robberies, improvements in vehicle security, increased surveillance around ATMs, and greater police visibility are essential. To address such challenges in Pakistan, the police introduced the Ababeel, Mujahid, Shaheen, and Dolphin squads, but public expectations require a more proactive approach and technological backup. Traditional policing methods may result in faulty investigations. International examples, such as Malaysias successful strategies, can offer valuable insights. These include enhanced police visibility, identifying crime hotspots, and fostering police-community partnerships, which have proven effective in improving public safety and reducing crime rates. To effectively combat street crime, the police should harness advanced technologies like AI, CCTV and mobile apps to detect crime and aid their prevention. Facial and licence plate recognition are key to identifying and managing offenders, while GPS tracking is invaluable for recovering stolen vehicles and monitoring taxis. However, relying solely on technology is not enough to reduce street crime. Effective law enforcement and active community engagement are equally crucial. Police need increased mobility, and the motorcycle business, including vehicle registration, requires stringent regulation. Initiatives like Safe City projects should be launched in major cities such as Karachi to enhance urban security. As most street crimes occur after sunset, identifying and reinforcing hotspots with security and lightingand public education on safety are imperative. Improving the justice system is essential to addressing inefficiencies and corruption. Enhancing investigation quality, prosecution, and witness cooperation is vital for increasing conviction rates. Citizen education regarding the safe use of mobiles, safe car parking, using ATMs, etc, should be part of urban policing. For this purpose, all capital police departments in Pakistan should initiate citizen-police education initiatives, including through distance learning. A holistic approach involving technology, community engagement, political will, professional policing, and responsible citizenry is necessary to deter and defeat street crime.  The writer is author of Pakistan: In Between Extremism and Peace. Twitter: [@alibabakhel1] Published in Dawn, May 11th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Fight till the last ball, PCB chief tells cricket team in Dublin
Description : Pakistan Cricket Board (PCB) Chairman Mohsin Naqvi on Sunday told the national team to fight till the last ball ahead of the second match of a three-match T20 series against Ireland. As he met players of the mens national team in the Irish capital of Dublin, the PCB quoted him as saying: Fight till the last ball; the competition should be apparent.
On Friday, Ireland recorded their maiden T20 win against Pakistan who could not defend a solid-looking 182-5 after being put in to bat first, dealing a shocking blow to the Babar Azam-led sides preparations for the World Cup, which is taking place next month in the United States. The loss to Ireland, who are in Pakistans group in the T20 World Cup, came after a series draw on home soil to a New Zealand squad missing most of their first-choice players. With Babar only recently reinstated as captain, it was another bump in the road for their tournament preparation.
Todays match will start at 7pm, with Ireland leading the series by 1-0. In a post on X, the PCB shared a video of Naqvi meeting the Green Shirts and speaking to them, adding that a detailed discussion on the action plan took place during the two-hour-long meetup. Encouraging the team, the PCB chairman urged the players to play with hard work, passion and a professional approach. He noted that T20 cricket needed a unique and aggressive approach, adding that victory was only possible if cricket was played in a modern manner. An action plan can be formulated while sitting in a room but the real test is on the ground, where the performance should be visible, the PCB quoted him as telling the team. Naqvi praised all players as undoubtedly talented, professional and the best, adding that the teams bowling attack was splendid. However, he emphasised that great attention was required when fielding so that the opponent cannot get any chance to score. The players are the hope for Pakistan and you have to meet the nations expectations. Teamwork is the fundamental thing for victory, the PCB chairman said. He noted that the public loved cricket and had expectations from the team. Naqvi said that success would come if all 11 of the players in the team performed with unity. No one is accepting the loss in the first match against Ireland. The real test after Ireland and England is the World Cup, he added. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Pakistans iCube-Qamar beams back first images from moons orbit
Description : Pakistans inaugural lunar satellite iCube-Qamar on Friday transmitted the first-ever images captured by it from the lunar orbit, the national space agency said. The satellite, part of Chinas Change-6 lunar mission, was launched from the Hainan province on May 3 and had successfully entered the moons orbit at 1:14pm on May 8. The moon is at an average distance of 384,400km from earth. The lunar module was designed by Islamabads Institute of Space Technology (IST) in collaboration with Chinas Shanghai University (SJTU) and Pakistans national space agency Suparco. The landmark images were unveiled at a ceremony organised at the China National Space Agency (CNSA) to mark the successful mission accomplishment, IST spokesperson and head of Department of Electrical and Computer Science, Dr Khurram Khursheed told Dawn.com. They were officially handed over to Pakistans ambassador to Beijing, she added.
View this post on Instagram
One of the first-ever images captured by Pakistans inaugural lunar satellite iCube-Qamar shows the moon and the sun.   Suparco/CNSA
The iCube-Q orbiter carries two optical cameras to image the lunar surface. The module is a cube satellite or cubesat  miniature satellites typically characterised by their small size and standardized cubic design. Due to their compact size and relatively low cost compared to traditional satellites, CubeSats offered opportunities for universities, research institutions and commercial entities to participate in space missions and gather valuable data for scientific advancement and innovation. Operating in extreme temperatures as low as minus 100 degrees Celsius, the satellite features a 7-kilogramme one-megapixel camera tailored for missions with power constraints.
Dr Khursheed had said the satellite would play a critical role in deep space missions. Its surface-level analysis capabilities, transmitting images at a modest 1-kbps, will provide crucial data on crater locations, water, and traces of ice on the moons surface, he had said. As the Chinese lander collects rock and soil samples, iCube-Q will spend three to six months orbiting the moon, capturing and transmitting images of the moon back to Earth. The IST said the opportunity to release the cubesat in lunar orbit from the Change-6 mission was offered by the CNSA through the Asia Pacific Space Cooperation Organisation (Apsco). After a thorough evaluation, Pakistans proposal was accepted out of all Apsco member states.
One of the first-ever images captured by Pakistans inaugural lunar satellite iCube-Qamar shows the sun shining brightly.   Suparco/CNSA
The Change-6 mission, which aims to explore the moons dark side, employs lunar research payloads from multiple countries, including Pakistans iCube-Qamar satellite. The mission is named after the mythical Chinese moon goddess. Nasa is banned by US law from any collaboration, direct or indirect, with China. On Change-6, China is carrying payloads from France, Italy, Sweden and Pakistan, while Change-7 will bear payloads from Russia, Switzerland and Thailand when it launches in 2026.
Change-6 aims to collect around 2kg of lunar samples from the far side of the Moon and bring them back to Earth for analysis. Chinese state news agency Xinhua had hailed it as the first endeavour of its kind in the history of human lunar exploration. China will send a robotic spacecraft in the coming days on a round trip to the moons far side in the first of three technically demanding missions that will pave the way for an inaugural Chinese crewed landing and a base on the lunar south pole. The probe is set to land in the immense South Pole-Aitken Basin, one of the largest known impact craters in the solar system. Once there, it will scoop up lunar soil and rocks, and carry out other experiments in the landing zone. With no direct line of sight with the Earth, Change-6 must rely on a recently deployed relay satellite orbiting the moon during its 53-day mission, including a never-before-attempted ascent from the moons hidden side on its return journey home. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : STYLE; ALL ABOUT MY MOTHER
Description :   An interview with designers Farah Talib Aziz and Maliha Aziz  the mother-daughter duo headlining the eponymous Farah Talib Aziz FTA label  could very well simply be a fashion feature. From a small business helmed by Farah from the basement of her home to the present day, when it is one of the countrys most coveted bridal brands as well as a titan in the lawn market, the story of FTAs rise could be a case study in the business of fashion. But it is also a human story  of how a woman, who was passionate about creating clothes, decided to make it her career when her eldest son left for university abroad. And then how, eventually, her younger daughter and son joined in, designing and strategising and expanding and advertising, until the FTA stores were packed choc-a-bloc with customers on a daily basis. It is a story about the business of fashion, yes, but it also fits like a glove into the theme of Mothers Day being celebrated today. And so, I sit across from Farah Talib Aziz and Maliha Aziz at the FTA flagship store in Karachis Phase 8 DHA commercial zone.  Dressed head-to-toe in FTA formal wear, theyre the classic interviewees for Mothers Day  finishing each others sentences, reminiscing over the same memories, growing older together and also, working together.  Their mutual passion for design binds Farah Talib Aziz and Maliha Aziz together, as does their love for each other.In the case of this particular mother-daughter power pair,we could perhaps also label them number one boss and employee Farah may have created the label 25-odd years ago but Maliha has also, for many years now, been very much the face of the brand, actively involved in the designing process, interacting regularly with the media, and enthusiastically outlining details of every new collection and campaign. Its a partnership that has worked wonders. Ive been in this space several times before and I am not exaggerating when I say that it has always been crowded. Its always shaadi season or Eid season or I-want-to-splurge-out-on-new-clothes season in Karachis it circles, and the ladies that dominate it tend to be FTA aficionados.  Today, for once, the bridal studio on the first floor where we sit is empty although, by the time we wrap up, I realise that customers have been waiting patiently on another floor for the interview to be over. Would your business have grown as much had you not been joined in it by your children, I ask Farah. No, she replies immediately. I have worked very hard, but there are so many different aspects of this work that are now divided between me and my children.  I have always been very vigilant about quality control, scrutinising every design and watching out for errors. But now, the brand extends over so many different genres of design, from bespoke bridals to ready-to-wear to unstitched lawn. It would be difficult to keep an eye on everything if I didnt have my children helping out. If I am ever occupied with one particular thing, I know that I can delegate the rest of my duties to Maliha and Umar [her son, Umar Aziz] and trust them completely. Mom isnt very business savvy, says Maliha. Her strength lies in the creative aspect of design, so it helps that she has people that she trusts working with her. Farah adds, I was very happy functioning from my homes basement. It was Maliha who kept pushing me to expand and diversify. Maliha nods. My mom would keep telling me not to take on too much responsibility by opening a store. I told her that we wouldnt know whether we could manage it unless we gave it a try. Eventually I convinced her to set up an additional workshop. From there, we expanded to a retail store in Karachis E Street, one in Lahore, the studio in DHA Karachi and, most recently, a store in Houston [in the US].   And for the longest time I didnt want to delve into lawn! Farah laughs. My first-ever lawn was created in collaboration with the Lakhany Silk Mills (LSM) group and they had approached me several times and I had refused. Maliha, however, was persistent. I remember that she had just got married at the time and was leaving for a trip abroad. Once she came back, she really got to work on the lawn. It was such a challenge, Maliha says, and it continues to be that way. How do you come up with a design that appeals to someone who is 16, as well as someone who is 60? From the colour to the embroidery patterns, to the print on the dupatta to the materials used  every detail has to be looked into! And we cant even utilise our most popular colours from a year ago, because then customers will think that we have got repetitive. Farah adds, We also have to keep the prices competitive, which is increasingly difficult, because raw materials and the manufacturing process have become so expensive. Was Maliha always inspired by her mothers creative streak?  Always! says Maliha. I remember when we used to go for vacations to the US when we were young, my mother would buy dresses for me and even bedsheets and use them as samples when we got home. A lot of international brands werent available in Pakistan at the time, and so my mum would recreate the designs on her own, adding frills to the bedsheets and stitching pillows. She would also create similar clothes for me. Farah says, I have always loved Eid and I would lay out new bedsheets in all the bedrooms on Eid day. I know how to cut, stitch and embroider, and I would create festive ghararas and shalwar qameez for Maliha. Id add cancans to her frocks and really doll her up   Every mother thinks that her daughter is a doll! Maliha laughs. She even used to embroider my clothes herself. And shed also create pleated skirts with little blazers for me and inspire me by saying, You look just like Lady Diana! Nevertheless, a fashion design business can be a behemoth that is hard to rein in, with responsibilities ranging from implementing the nitty-gritties of design to deciding upon prices and production quantities. Was Maliha inspired enough to want to join her mothers atelier? Yes, she says, I dont think that I can imagine working anywhere else.   Honestly, I dont consider my work difficult, Farah observes. I really enjoy it, and my workers have been with me from the time that I first started out. Initially, I started out with a single embroiderer. Then, I got a tailor on board. Eventually, I had seven embroiderers working with me. Slowly, the team expanded as business grew. Today, they are all like family to me. Has some of the designing now been delegated to Maliha? I do head a design team but, ultimately, everything has to be approved by my mum, she says. Its like preparing for an exam. Even though she has selected the colours and patterns from before, were still very nervous about showing her the final designs. And I can really scold her if I dont like something or there is some flaw in the design, Farah laughs. Maliha herself has two young sons. Does she find it difficult balancing motherhood with the daily rigmarole at FTA?  I think I am lucky that I work with my mother. If ever I am busy, she can take over for me, says Maliha. My elder son is now five and I have pictures of him everywhere in my workplace, him lying in the workshop, playing with scraps of cloth. We have a separate area designated for children and some of the working mothers in our staff bring their children along with them. Also, I live mere minutes away from the FTA studio, and my mother-in-law and husband are very supportive. There are times when I can pick my son from school, make sure that hes had lunch and then return to work for three hours in the evening. There are other times when I am at a shoot that starts at seven in the morning and ends at seven in the evening and I cant leave at any point. It can get difficult and hectic, but I am lucky to have people who support me.  She adds: I support them too! When my husband travels, I take on more responsibilities too. What are the challenges that Maliha faces as a working mother? I think that theres a lot of mum guilt, especially because everything gets posted on social media and you worry that you may not have done enough for your child.  Its an Instagram world and you may have spent an hour decorating a basket for your childs school activity while other parents may have invested an entire day into it. And even though your child is happy, you start fretting that, perhaps, I should have made a better costume, or created a better basket. Also, people judge very quickly. You want to be there for your child but, sometimes, you cant manage a play date thats at 2pm or at 4pm. I dont remember our parents ever facing such pressures. I wonder out loud whether pressures were perhaps different back when Farah started working on her design business. Was she the odd one out at a time when not many women worked? Yes, she says, but I was lucky that my husband was very understanding. Also, I started small and only built up my business over time. Yes, a lot of my friends would constantly be meeting and I wouldnt be able to, because I was at work. I have been very lucky  I love what I do and everyone around me has been very supportive. Maliha seems to have inherited a similar love for the brand. I reminisce about how FTA initially started making waves on social media with the aid of creative campaigns, celebrity collaborations and fun behind-the-scenes (BTS) footage from shoots.  Maliha says: I love marketing, Ive studied it too. We started coming up with BTS content back when very few people were doing it, and I enjoy curating campaigns for new collections. But I do think that what I enjoy the most is the designing process. I know that its important to keep an eye on profits and set targets, but we have people who worry about all this. If I started thinking about finances all the time, I feel that my creativity would suffer. And my mums the same. Like mother, like daughter. A love for design binds Farah Talib Aziz and Maliha Aziz together as does their love for each other. Mothers are usually the number one women in their childrens lives. In the case of this particular mother-daughter power pair, we could perhaps add in number one boss and mentor.  And Maliha can be number one employee. Published in Dawn, ICON, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Mothers Day: A letter to my mum
Description :   As-salaam Alaikum, Maa, I hope this letter finds you in good spirits. Startled you with my letter, right? And you are wondering what on earth has made me write a letter when I could have simply messaged you or called you up. And I know, fumbling with anxiety, you have checked your phone by now to see if you had missed my calls or messages.  So let me assure you, everything is fine Maa, please do not fret. And keep reading this.   You know, this time I wanted to do something really special for you on Mothers Day. First, I thought of gifting you those emerald earrings you longed to have, the ones whose picture you have saved in your phones gallery for ages. Or buy you a pair of comfy shoes that will help you walk around, doing the household chores easily. But then I realised that these materialistic things will not reveal my love for you until I express it myself. Let me put it straight  for me, Mothers Day is not meant to be celebrated on only one day of the year, every day is Mothers Day.  How? Because I cannot imagine a day without your presence. The very thought of life without you makes my heart skip a beat. My day kick-starts when each morning you wake me up for the Fajr prayers and I see warmth, wisdom and love emanating from your beautiful countenance.  The reason why I exist today is because you didnt let go of believing in me. Its your resilience, courage, prayers and unconditional love that has given me the vigour to embrace the adversities of my life fearlessly. On days when the worries of tomorrow overwhelm me and make it impossible for me to climb out of bed, your counseling helps me rise and muster up the strength to combat the challenges of the world. You are not only my mother, but you are also my best friend, my North Star and my greatest motivator. When the hardships of my life seem to be unbearable, its in your arms that I find solace. When I am all lost and unable to make a decision, your words of wisdom show me the direction and help me stay focused. When situations get tough and I am on the verge of giving up, its your constant reminders to remain steadfast and have strong faith in the Almighty, that prevents me from relinquishing my objectives.  Above all, you are my greatest well-wisher. After scooping accolades, when I return home all elated and brimming with joy, you are the first one to embrace me and rejoice at my success. As I sit at my desk, penning down my sentiments, I cant help recalling the love and devotion with which you have taught me when I was little. The patience and dedication with which you have coached me have not only helped me soar in my academics, but also in all the endeavours of my life. The values and morals you have instilled in me have guided me, helped me distinguish between right and wrong, and have thus shaped my entire personality. The greatest achievement for me is when people praise me for taking after you, and I am all the more grateful to Allah for blessing me with such an amazing mother.  You have always been my true protector and guide, ever since my birth. How can I not recount the numerous sleepless nights youve spent by my bed, praying for my health whenever I have fallen ill, or the anxiousness with which you have waited for me, after school and outside the examination halls?  The most incredible part is that though this little daughter of yours is now a grown-up, your love for her has not faded away, instead it has amplified. Even today, I can see the anxiousness in your eyes when I am late from work, can feel the worry in your voice when I am unable to respond to your calls, and can discern your endearment when you cook delectable food items, especially for me. Maa, you have been a saviour throughout the ebbs and flows of my lifes struggles. The reason why I exist today is because you didnt let go of believing in me. Its your resilience, courage, prayers and unconditional love that has given me the vigour to embrace the adversities of my life fearlessly. Whether I needed a shoulder to cry on or a friend to confide in, an expert to offer me advice, or a buddy to celebrate my minuscule accomplishments, Maa, you have executed all these roles, flawlessly! I know no matter how hard I try, I can never be able to repay you for the amount of sacrifices you have made for me and for the unfaltering care, support and unconditional love you have showered on me. Nevertheless, with utmost gratitude, I pray to the Almighty Allah to bless you with abundant health and happiness, today and always. Ameen Happy Mothers Day, Maa! Love you to the moon and back!
Your ever-loving daughter.  Published in Dawn, Young World, May 11th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : No such thing as strategic state-owned enterprises, says Finance Minister Aurangzeb
Description : Finance Minister Muhammad Aurangzeb on Sunday said that there was no such thing as strategic state-owned enterprises (SOEs) as he stressed the need for privatisation. He made the remarks at a pre-budget conference in Lahore, two days after  Deputy Prime Minister Ishaq Dar said the government would limit its business only to strategic and essential SOEs under its domain but their number would be reduced from 40 after scrutiny. Chairing the Cabinet Committee on Privatisation (CCoP) meeting, which was attended by the finance minister, Dar said privatisation of loss-making SOEs would be a priority. The meeting noted that 40 SOEs were currently categorised as strategic or essential, but respective ministries would submit their details to the Cabinet Committee on State-Owned Enterprises (CCoSOE). The CCoSOE will determine the status of the SOEs to be categorised as strategic or essential entities. Speaking on Sunday, Aurangzeb said: There is no such as [a] strategic SOE. Talking about the meeting chaired by Dar on Friday, he continued, We are absolutely on the same wavelength  that there is no such thing as a strategic SOE. The finance minister said that a meeting would be held tomorrow where we will go back to various ministries and say that all this should be handed over to the private sector. There will be public-private partnership and we will accelerate the privatisation agenda, he said. Commenting on concerns regarding the privatisation of Pakistan International Airlines (PIA), Aurangzeb said the government was not just looking at foreign investors. They are local and foreign investors who are bidding [] there is no such thing that we are only looking at foreign investors, he said. Commenting on a fresh loan programme with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) programme, he said that a larger and longer programme was needed to bring permanence in macroeconomic stability and structural reforms. He also talked about energy reforms, saying that there were leakages and stressed the need for stopping theft. He said that changes were being brought to the boards of distribution companies (Discos) in order to bring in those from the private sector for better corporate governance. And then you will see how we bring those Discos towards concessions or privatisation or a combination of both, he emphasised. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : IMF mission to meet Pakistani authorities next week to discuss next phase of engagement: official
Description : An International Monetary Fund (IMF) mission will meet Pakistani authorities next week to discuss the next phase of engagement, an official from the international money lender said on Sunday. Speaking to Dawn.com, Esther Perez Ruiz, the Funds resident representative for Pakistan, said: A mission team led by Nathan Porter, IMFs mission chief to Pakistan, will meet with authorities next week to discuss the next phase of engagement. The aim is to lay the foundation for better governance and stronger, more inclusive, and resilient economic growth that will benefit all Pakistanis, she added. Pakistan last month completed a short-term $3 billion programme, which helped stave off sovereign default, but the government has stressed the need for a fresh, longer-term programme. Last week, the Fund said that a mission was expected to visit Pakistan this month to discuss the FY25 budget, policies, and reforms under a potential new programme for the welfare of all Pakistanis. Pakistan narrowly averted default last summer, and the $350bn economy has stabilised after the completion of the last IMF programme, with inflation coming down to around 17 per cent in April from a record high 38pc last May. The country is still dealing with a high fiscal shortfall and while the external account deficit has been controlled through import control mechanisms, it has come at the expense of stagnating growth, which is expected to be around 2pc this year compared to negative growth last year. Pakistan is expected to seek at least $6bn and request additional financing from the Fund under the Resilience and Sustainability Trust. On Friday, the Fund said that downside risks for the economy remain exceptionally high. Downside risks remain exceptionally high. While the new government has indicated its intention to continue the SBAs (standby arrangement) policies, political uncertainty remains significant, said the IMF in its staff report following the second and final review under the standby agreement. The Fund added that political complexities and high cost of living could weigh on policy, adding that policy slippages, together with lower external financing, could undermine the narrow path to debt sustainability and place pressure on the exchange rate. The IMF also said higher commodity prices and disruptions to shipping, or tighter global financial conditions, would also adversely affect external stability for the cash-strapped nation. The fund stressed the need for timely post-programme external financing disbursements. Additional input from Reuters Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Situation in AJK calms down after 2 days of violent clashes
Description : Following violent clashes over the last 48 hours, which left a policeman dead, the situation in Muzaffarabad seemed to have calmed down on Sunday, with a Rangers detachment that was sent to Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK) from Kohala having been withdrawn. AJK witnessed violent clashes between the police and activists of a rights movement amid a wheel-jam and shutter-down strike across the territory on Friday and Saturday, which left at least one police official dead and more than 90 others injured, officials told Dawn.com on Saturday. Mirpur Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP) Kamran Ali had said that Sub-inspector Adnan Qureshi succumbed to a gunshot wound in the chest in the town of Islamgarh, where he was deployed to stop a rally for Muzaffarabad under the banner of the Jammu Kashmir Joint Awami Action Committee (JAAC). The JAAC, which has traders at the forefront in most parts of the state, has been seeking the provision of electricity as per hydropower generation cost in AJK, subsidised wheat flour and an end to the privileges of the elite class. They called for the strike following the arrest of at least 70 of their members in raids on Thursday. Reports emerged in the wake of the protests on Sunday that three Rangers battalions had entered the territory through Kohala and were awaiting further orders. However, AJK Minister for Rural Development Faisal Mumtaz Rathore confirmed that the Rangers, due to the intervention of President Asif Zardari, were called back as soon as they entered Azad Kashmir since the situation had calmed down. Meanwhile, in Islamabad, former prime minister of AJK Sardar Abdul Qayyum Niazi slammed the deployment, calling it a drama and an attempt to score political points. First they send them, then call them back, what is this? the ex-AJK PM said. Those fighting for their rights and engaging in protest are free to do so, but they must remain peaceful, Niazi said in a press conference. He added that they (the protestors) must not give the enemy a chance to sow discord within the territory and create infighting. In a post on Facebook, Rathore acknowledged the public demands for cheap electricity, but admitted that addressing them was out of his hands. The big demand of the people, the demand for cheap electricity and the end of loadshedding, falls under the jurisdiction of the Government of Pakistan, Rathore said. Urging the public to remain peaceful, he said, In this one year [I have been in office], I have never been against the right to peaceful protest and [never] supported violence against people. In the aftermath of the protests, JAAC leader Shaukat Nawaz Mir reiterated that the committee is a peaceful organisation and willing to negotiate with the authorities to ensure the provision of cheap electricity and cheap flour. He also appreciated the withdrawal of the Rangers from the area. We have planned another shutter-down strike, he told reporters on Sunday. We have been peaceful for the last year and always will be a peaceful movement. This territory and its institutions and police are our own. Mir maintained that the JAAC is advocating for the rights of the public in AJK, but it is the bureaucrats who do not understand the publics needs that are doing the damage. The JAAC is peaceful and open to negotiations, Mir added, requesting to be notified by the authorities about decisions taken. We do not want to hurt anyone. He also slammed the federal government for not cutting down spending while at the same time claiming they have no room in the budget to subsidise electricity or flour. The government claims they cant provide cheap electricity and flour because they have no budget, but they have the money for watches and cars, Mir said, adding that the federal government and the prime minister should be ashamed. I dont want my forum to be controversial, Mir said. We are made up of respectable politicians  the local council is standing with us. The JAAC leader added that the movement was successful since members of multiple parties and councils are on our side. Our nation is conscious now. There is no politics here, we just want our rights and identity. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Fight till the last ball, PCB chief tells cricket team in Dublin
Description : Pakistan Cricket Board (PCB) Chairman Mohsin Naqvi on Sunday told the national team to fight till the last ball ahead of the second match of a three-match T20 series against Ireland. As he met players of the mens national team in the Irish capital of Dublin, the PCB quoted him as saying: Fight till the last ball; the competition should be apparent.
On Friday, Ireland recorded their maiden T20 win against Pakistan who could not defend a solid-looking 182-5 after being put in to bat first, dealing a shocking blow to the Babar Azam-led sides preparations for the World Cup, which is taking place next month in the United States. The loss to Ireland, who are in Pakistans group in the T20 World Cup, came after a series draw on home soil to a New Zealand squad missing most of their first-choice players. With Babar only recently reinstated as captain, it was another bump in the road for their tournament preparation.
Todays match will start at 7pm, with Ireland leading the series by 1-0. In a post on X, the PCB shared a video of Naqvi meeting the Green Shirts and speaking to them, adding that a detailed discussion on the action plan took place during the two-hour-long meetup. Encouraging the team, the PCB chairman urged the players to play with hard work, passion and a professional approach. He noted that T20 cricket needed a unique and aggressive approach, adding that victory was only possible if cricket was played in a modern manner. An action plan can be formulated while sitting in a room but the real test is on the ground, where the performance should be visible, the PCB quoted him as telling the team. Naqvi praised all players as undoubtedly talented, professional and the best, adding that the teams bowling attack was splendid. However, he emphasised that great attention was required when fielding so that the opponent cannot get any chance to score. The players are the hope for Pakistan and you have to meet the nations expectations. Teamwork is the fundamental thing for victory, the PCB chairman said. He noted that the public loved cricket and had expectations from the team. Naqvi said that success would come if all 11 of the players in the team performed with unity. No one is accepting the loss in the first match against Ireland. The real test after Ireland and England is the World Cup, he added. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Canada arrests fourth Indian national in killing of Sikh activist
Description : A fourth Indian national was charged by Canadian authorities on Saturday in the 2023 killing of a separatist Sikh leader in Vancouver. Amandeep Singh, 22, was already being held for unrelated gun charges before being charged with first-degree murder and conspiracy to commit murder in the slaying of Hardeep Singh Nijjar. Three other Indian nationals were arrested this month. The killing sparked a diplomatic row between Ottawa and New Delhi when Prime Minister Justin Trudeau linked Indian intelligence to the killing. Nijjar  who immigrated to Canada in 1997 and became a citizen in 2015  had advocated for a separate Sikh state, known as Khalistan, carved out of India. He had been wanted by Indian authorities for alleged terrorism and conspiracy to commit murder  allegations he denied. He was shot dead on June 18, 2023, by masked assailants in the parking lot of the Sikh temple he led in suburban Vancouver. Trudeau announced several months later that Canada had credible allegations connecting Indian intelligence to the slaying. India dismissed the allegations as absurd and responded furiously, briefly curbing visas for Canadians and forcing Ottawa to withdraw diplomats. In November, the US Justice Department charged an Indian citizen living in the Czech Republic with allegedly plotting a similar assassination attempt on American soil. Prosecutors said in unsealed court documents that an Indian government official was also involved in the planning. The shock allegations came after US President Joe Biden hosted Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi for a rare state visit, as Washington seeks closer ties with India against Chinas growing influence. US intelligence agencies have assessed that the plot on American soil was approved by Indias top spy official at the time, Samant Goel, the Washington Post reported in April. Canada is home to some 770,000 Sikhs, who make up about two per cent of the countrys population, with a vocal minority calling for an independent state of Khalistan. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Second night of auroras seen amid extreme solar storm
Description : Auroras lit up skies across swaths of the planet for the second night in a row on Saturday, after already dazzling Earthlings from the United States to Tasmania to the Bahamas the day before. A powerful solar storm  which could continue into Sunday  has triggered spectacular celestial shows usually confined to the far northern reaches of the planet, hence their nickname of the northern lights. I have the sensation of living through a historic night in France [] It was really charged, with solar particles and emotions, Eric Lagadec, an astrophysicist at the Observatoire de Cote dAzur, wrote on social media after the first night. Find good spots, away from the lights, with a clear view to the north! Late on Saturday evening, pictures again started trickling onto social media as people in the United States reported sightings, though not as strong as Friday nights. The first of several coronal mass ejections (CMEs)  expulsions of plasma and magnetic fields from the Sun   came just after 4pm GMT on Friday, according to the US-based National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)s Space Weather Prediction Center (SWPC). It was later upgraded to an extreme geomagnetic storm   the first since the Halloween Storms of October 2003 that caused blackouts in Sweden and damaged power infrastructure in South Africa. Fridays storm was listed as hitting level five geomagnetic conditions  the highest on the scale. Saturday saw G3 to G5 conditions, with G4 or higher conditions predicted Sunday and G3 conditions possible into Monday. But no major disruptions to power or communications networks appear to have been reported this time around, despite initial worries from authorities. There have only been preliminary reports of power grid irregularities, degradation to high-frequency communications, GPS and possibly satellite navigation, the SWPC said. Elon Musk, whose Starlink satellite internet operator has some 5,000 satellites in low Earth orbit, said his satellites were under a lot of pressure, but holding up so far. However Chinas National Centre for Space Weather issued a red alert on Saturday morning, warning the storm will impact communications and navigation in most areas of the country, state news agency Xinhua reported. Auroras were visible in the northern half of the country, according to media reports. Excitement over the phenomenon   and otherworldly photos of pink, green and purple night skies   popped up across the world, from Mont Saint-Michel on the French coast to Payette, Idaho  in the western United States  to Australias island state of Tasmania.
People pose for photos as a geomagnetic storm lights up the night sky above the Bonneville Salt Flats on May 10 in Wendover, Utah.  AFP
Unlike solar flares, which travel at the speed of light and reach Earth in around eight minutes, CMEs travel at a more sedate pace, with officials putting the current average at 800 kilometres per second. The CMEs emanated from a massive sunspot cluster that is 17 times wider than our planet. People with eclipse glasses can also look for the sunspot cluster during the day. The Sun is approaching the peak of an 11-year cycle that brings heightened activity. NOAAs Brent Gordon encouraged the public to try to capture the night sky with phone cameras even if they couldnt see auroras with their naked eyes. Youd be amazed at what you see in that picture versus what you see with your eyes. Fluctuating magnetic fields associated with geomagnetic storms induce currents in long wires, including power lines, which can potentially lead to blackouts. Long pipelines can also become electrified, leading to engineering problems. Spacecraft are also at risk from high doses of radiation, although the atmosphere prevents this from reaching Earth. NASA has a dedicated team looking into astronaut safety and can ask astronauts on the International Space Station to move to places within the outpost that are better shielded. Even pigeons and other species that have internal biological compasses could be affected. Pigeon handlers have noted a reduction in birds coming home during geomagnetic storms, according to NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The most powerful geomagnetic storm in recorded history, known as the Carrington Event after British astronomer Richard Carrington, occurred in September 1859. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : ADB links support with IMFs clean chit
Description :   Given my interactions with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the dialogue decisiveness of the current government, I feel very hopeful that there will be a successor programme from the Fund, said the Asian Development Banks (ADB) Country Director for Pakistan Yong Ye in an exclusive interview on the sidelines of ADBs 57th Annual Meeting in Tbilisi this week. Tacitly indicating that support from ADB would only be possible with a clean chit from the Fund, Mr Ye expressed cautious optimism for the economy. Highlighting the uncertainties from last year, Mr Ye termed the IMF agreement announced in June as a miracle. Since then, however, he said, the caretaker government did a good job stabilising the economy under the Funds Stand-By Arrangement. More importantly, he added, with the IMF agreement in place, the central banks foreign exchange reserves increased from $4.4 billion to over $9bn in the week ending on May 3. While the country may still be in the ICU, its immediate liquidity crisis has been sorted, and default has been avoided. This has given some confidence to the markets, he said. Record highs of PSX Commenting on the frequent new highs of the Pakistan Stock Exchange (PSX), Mr Ye observed that previously, when the eurobond payment was due, there had been a lot of hype in the media with speculations about whether the country would be able to repay or default. Such pieces did not induce courage and the markets started fluctuating, contributing to a fluctuating exchange rate. Banks top official says Pakistan has sorted out immediate liquidity crisis, but still in ICU This time around, in April, when the $1bn eurobond payment was due, it was paid without fanfare, indicating much better market confidence. Other positive indicators, such as a narrowing external account deficit and recovering remittances, have also improved investor confidence. However, fiscal deficit challenges remain. One major reason behind them is the high interest rate and high debt servicing burden. Act on what you know In my first meeting with Finance Minister Muhammad Aurangzeb, he showed his commitment to implementing and acting on reforms, said Mr Ye. Pakistan does not need more economic prescriptions, he said, agreeing with the finance ministers recent statements. He said the general perception is that Pakistan knows what it needs to do but never does it. Act on what you know needs to be done. He emphasised that the ADB management wants to be with the government in this difficult time. The agency understands the need to ensure that the debt is sustainable rather than an added burden that does not remove the constraints the country is facing. While the economy is recovering, there is still uncertainty moving forward. The removal of this uncertainty depends very much on the governments commitment and ability to implement economic and structural reforms. A special arrangement Mr Ye emphasised the importance of investment in reviving the economy and the role the Special Investment Facilitation Council (SIFC) could play. My understanding of SIFC is that it is a special arrangement to attract foreign direct investment from some targeted countries, he said. From the ADBs point of view, while the SIFC may be a quick short-term solution, Pakistan still needs to look for long-term systematic solutions to attract foreign direct investment. This would require an overall enabling environment with improved regulations and transparency. Given past unsuccessful incidents such as Reko Diq, SIFC, at least in the short run, can demonstrate the countrys potential and ability for investment, which can then be further broadened for other countries. An important element in attracting FDI is the ability of firms to repatriate profit out of the country. At the moment, investors may believe that while earning money in Pakistan is possible, repatriating profits is challenging. Non-productivity of real estate The country needs to increase its revenue and rationalise expenditures, Mr Ye remarked. As an example, he highlights the real estate sector where a lot of savings are invested. The real estate sector is just financial addition with no value addition. If the country invests in its natural resources instead, the country will start rolling, he said. Inflation is on a downward trend, and if this trend continues, the monetary policy rate will come down, Mr Ye opinioned, resulting in a smaller burden of debt servicing and more fiscal room. This will also unlock the investment and borrowing by the private sector, he hoped. Since there is a lot of pent-up investment demand during the period of high interest rates, Pakistan may enter into a boom cycle when the rates start coming down. But for the revival to be sustainable, it all comes back to reforms, he said.  Remaining pledges While ADB was among the institutions that pledged support after the disastrous floods of 2022, almost the entire amount has yet to be disbursed. ADB had pledged about $1.5bn, of which only $108.79 million has been released according to a media report, with a further $340.9m expected this year. In response to why there has been a delay, Mr Ye said that the amount pledged was for reconstruction and that the process cannot be rushed. The damages have to be assessed along with the ground realities, keeping in mind the new climate risk profile and the possibility that these areas may be flooded again, he said. Pointing out that water was still standing in some areas till the start of this year, Mr Ye said that the new climate risk profile needs to be assessed before the feasibility study. Some roads need to be redesigned, followed by the procurement process, contract award, and finally, disbursement. The entire process is lengthy. Mr Ye identified several critical areas for Pakistans long-term economic growth. These include controlling inflation, reducing the fiscal deficit, and diversifying the export base. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Govt hints at raising wheat purchase target
Description :  Drive to buy 400,000 tonnes of grain kicks off; farmers want wheat procured from across Punjab
 Kissan leader urges govt to ensure official rate of staple, terms proposed subsidy a pittance LAHORE: The Pakistan Agricultural Storage and Services Corporation Limited (Passco) on Saturday began its second phase of wheat procurement from Faisalabad in line with a decision of the federal government to procure 400,000 tonnes more than the original target of 1.4 million tonnes. As he kick-started the second phase, Food Minister Rana Tanveer hinted at the possibility of further increasing the target to facilitate farmers. Passco had originally aimed to purchase 1.4m tonnes, but after farmers started protesting, the pressure on the federal and provincial governments piled on and the premier decided to increase the target to 1.8m tonnes. As of now, Passco has achieved 98 per cent of the initial target and distribution of gunny bags is already underway to meet the increased target. Farmers, however, are not happy with the governments decision to procure slightly more wheat than intended. They said Passco  a federal body  operated in 13 out of 97 tehsils in Punjab and the decision to purchase additional wheat from designated areas would have a negligible impact. According to farmers, the tradeable surplus this year is expected to be about 10m tonnes and buying 400,000 tonnes would hardly make any difference. Punjab, on the other hand, is reluctant to procure wheat from growers despite province-wide agitations and the persistent stance of farmers. This has also caused a significant impact on the price of wheat, with the staple being sold at a rate much lower than the official price of Rs3,900 per 40kg. The Pakistan Kissan Ittehad claimed that farmers had lost Rs1,150 billion under the wheat head alone due to the crashing prices which reportedly dipped below Rs3,000 per 40kg. Instead of procurement, the Punjab government said it would compensate farmers with interest-free loans of Rs150bn. Kissan leader Khalid Mahmood Khokar, however, is not impressed, saying the paltry subsidy came at a cost of Rs1,150bn. Instead of this gimmickry, please ensure an officially declared price, which the provincial government had itself calculated, announced, and promised, Mr Khalid urged the Punjab government. The crisis Pakistan is going through the most difficult wheat season of its history, exacerbated by policy failure and the import of millions of tonnes of wheat shortly before the bumper harvest. The bumper crop followed a record import of 3.5m tonnes by the private sector allegedly due to the weakness of the caretaker regime.
Against the backdrop of such a huge import, hoarders also released their stock to earn profit. The releases of stock by the hoarders and the import of the commodity flooded the market and even met the entire domestic requirement, leaving Passco and the Punjab Food Department with 4m tonnes of unexhausted stock. The 3.5m tonnes imports were staggered in a way, in the name of sustained supplies, that it overlapped with domestic harvesting season and created havoc for the domestic market, explained Muhammad Ramzan, a wheat trader from Lahore. At the start of this month, the Punjab government had promised a probe into the wheat scandal against the backdrop of protests by the farmers. On Friday, the farmers resumed their protests from Multan against the provincial governments decision to not buy wheat from farmers. At the protest, PKI leader Khokhar had said the agitation would continue against the government in every district of the province till the acceptance of their demands. He had said the federal government was procuring the wheat in 16 tehsils of the province, while the Punjab government had not purchased even a single grain so far. Federal government should also buy wheat from other tehsils of the province, he had demanded. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : KP governor, CM Gandapur exchange threats in acrid spat
Description : PESHAWAR / DERA ISMAIL KHAN: The acrimony between Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Chief Minister Ali Amin Khan Gandapur and Governor Faisal Karim Kundi intensified on Saturday when the two leaders threatened each other with dire consequences. A day after the governors fiery speech, Chief Minister Gandapur warned Governor Kundi to stay within the limits of his constitutional position and avoid making olitical statements. After appearing in an anti-terrorism court in connection with the murder of former KP law minister Sardar Israrullah Khan Gandapur, the CM who belongs to the PTI said he could use his powers to banish Mr Kundi from Governor House. This Governor House is not your property. Dont force me to  turn it into a museum and open it for the public.
I will shift you to a two-room annexe, said Mr Gandapur. He went on to say that even fuel for the governors official vehicles comes from the budget of the provincial government and threatened to stop it if the governor who belongs to PPP didnt refrain from political statements, below-the-belt remarks and confrontation. Gandapur warns Kundi will be banished from official residence for indulging in politics, confrontation Youre the governor; politics is not your job, Mr Gandapur warned, calling himself the elected representative who came to power with the voters mandate. The CM added that if the governor did not pay heed to his warning, he would seek his removal. [T]he letter which notified you [as governor] will also denotify you. In a hard-hitting speech on Friday, Governor Kundi had indirectly accused the CM of being involved in the killing of former law minister Mr Israrullah and ANP leader Umar Khattab Sherani.
Mr Israrullah was killed in a suicide attack in his hometown of Kulachi near Dera Ismail Khan in October 2013. While government officials blamed the Waziristan-based Gandapur group for the bombing, a little-known shadowy group, Ansarul Mujahideen, claimed responsibility. ANPs Mr Sherani was murdered in December 2021, a day before the provinces local government elections, which he was contesting as a candidate for the post of D.I. Khan mayor. The governor said that if he relinquished his constitutional post, he would prove to be a bigger nemesis for CM Gandapur. Mr Kundi also warned that protecting the Governor House was his constitutional duty and whoever tried to occupy it would be dragged on roads. This was an apparent reply to Mr Gandapurs May 9 statement in which he warned against efforts to impose governors rule in KP and said PTI activists would occupy the Governor House. Want good ties with CM Meanwhile, in conversation with Dawn, Mr Kundi said he hoped for good relations with the chief minister, but whoever talked about occupying the Governor House will be answered befittingly. People of KP shouldnt suffer in the fight between the prime minister, governor and chief minister, he said, advising the provincial government to improve the law and order situation. He recalled the kidnapping of a sessions judge in Tank last month and claimed the chief minister paid extortion money for his release. Expected animosity The acrimonious relationship between the two leaders  both being bitter political rivals hailing from D.I.Khan  was expected since Mr Kundi was nominated for the post by his partys chairman, Bilawal Bhutto-Zardari. The CM expressed his disapproval of the appointment by not attending  Mr Kundis oath-taking ceremony last Saturday. A few days later, on May 8, the governor KP did not sign a summary moved by the provincial government to convene an assembly session, forcing the provincial government to requisition the session through the speaker to present the current fiscal budget, according to sources. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Footprints: the day the city of Karachi went berserk
Description : This article was originally published on May 12, 2017 KARACHI: Attempt after attempt fails to elicit comments from direct witnesses to the carnage that took place in Karachi on May 12 ten years ago. All these men served as judges in the countrys high courts and the apex court before they retired to re-join the legal fraternity as seasoned practitioners of the law. For each of my requests, I receive either excuse me, or sorry. Finally, one of them agrees to talk  but not openly.  Please dont mention my name, says the retired Sindh High Court judge as our conversation ends. You may write each and every word I have shared with you but not my name. I would prefer to be an anonymous source. One never knows here what can happen the next day: its better to stay away from even the memories of such controversial events. The ordeal he recalls of that bloody Saturday refreshes the grim memories of the city being under siege for nearly 24 hours, held hostage by forces in the face of whom even jurists and law-enforcers were helpless.  Two rival rallies had been planned that day  one by the legal fraternity, backed by parties then in the opposition, to welcome into the city the then deposed chief justice, Iftikhar Mohammed Chaudhry, and the other organised by the Muttahida Qaumi Movement (MQM), favoured by the then military dictator General Pervez Musharraf, in protest against the politicisation of the issue of the presidential reference against Mr Chaudhry. A certain level of fear had prevailed, but no one could have guessed the deeply disturbing events that were to follow  certainly not the then serving high court judge. I was travelling with my driver and armed guard to the Sindh High Court where the chief justice had to deliver an address when we were forced to stop near Sir Syed Girls College in Nazimabad, he says.  Armed motorcyclists surrounded his official, flag-bearing car, pulled out his driver and switched off its engine, seizing the keys. The bikers then bludgeoned the stationary car several times, so hard that its bumper fell off. In one of the busiest and most densely populated city neighbourhoods, a serving judge sat in fear.  I talked to them, he says. They were obviously aware that I was a high court judge. After debate and argument, they allowed me to leave but I reminded them that I couldnt because keys of my car had been snatched by one of them. Finally, the key was returned and the judge was allowed to leave. As he got back into his car, the men surrounding him came up with their last strike: they stripped his car of the national flag. At the nearest police station of Pak Colony, he waited for nearly two hours for police security to arrive, as promised by the Governors House after it was informed about the episode. Then came an SSP-ranking officer with his team to escort me, he says. The police left us some two kilometres from the Singh High Court building, saying that they could no longer help us. My driver parked the car at a safer place. Then, with my driver and guard, I walked to the high court to find all entrances blocked. Finally, I jumped over one of the walls to enter the building. If this was the experience of a high court judge, one can only imagine the situation for political workers. In anticipation of the two rallies, law enforcers had been put on high alert the day before. The fire brigade had been directed to remain on standby and hospitals were asked to ready themselves. But the next day, hapless citizens found that the city had been abandoned by the law-enforcement agencies, and armed youths were wandering at will. Nasir Khan, one of the Awami National Party workers, witnessed a few of them at Malir Halt. I meet Nasir almost at the same spot where he narrowly escaped death. As our rally from Quaidabad reached here [Malir Halt], it came under fire, he says. I miraculously remained unhurt but I watched two of my friends die from bullet wounds and several others fell injured. It was a terrible experience and even today I shiver while recalling that day. After 10 years, only eyewitness accounts of the May 12 events remain. Justice and any action on the part of the state are still awaited. Should we call ourselves humanity when the fallen remain un-avenged a year to a day since that fateful day in May? wrote Justice Qazi Faez Isa, a Supreme Court judge and former chief justice of the Balochistan High Court, in this paper in 2008. Years later, the question remains pertinent. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2017  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Mothers Day: Reflections of a mother
Description : This piece was originally published in Dawn, Young World on May 9, 2020. Spending sleepless nights while tending to children, feeding them, changing diapers, etc. are a part of life of every mother having infants. When the infants grow up a little, the next phase is to educate them, teach them manners and make them learn to be a part of the world out there. It is tough to do all that for me, like every other mother. After all it is not all I have to do. One has to focus on ones career and household chores at the same time, and fulfil ones duties towards other family members. Did I mention a me-time somewhere in all that I said? I guess not. There is no mentioning of it simply because there is no time left for me while doing all that I do. It is said that you learn about the true value of parents once you have children of your own. I have found this to be exactly true. The sacrifices and unconditional love it takes to be a mother has certainly made me realise the sacrifices my mother made in bringing me up. Looking back at my life, I wish I could change all those moments in my life when, as a child, I misbehaved with my mother. I also wish that I had spent more time with her and made life easier for her. As my children grow up, they seem to become less obedient and respectful. This really hurts. I see this as a general trend in all the children, nowadays. With some exceptions, the older they get, the less respect they show to their mother and elders in general. Having a mind of ones own is fine, but there cannot be any excuse for bad behaviour towards ones mother. And also just because your mother is less strict and more friendly than your father, it should not lead you to not show respect to her. Mothers like me do not want our children to be our puppets. All we ask for is recognition of our love and efforts. Expecting respectfulness is a part of that recognition. Every mother would love her child to come up to her and, as a minimum, thank her for her efforts. It would be great if the child could offer to help her in little ways. If nothing else, they should at least not leave any mess for the mother to clean up! Mothers Day is important, but it is more than just a special day. It is really a reminder that mothers deserve our respect and recognition for their love at all times. For a child to have this realisation certainly means more to mothers than having a card or flowers on Mothers Day. This is because it means that this realisation would translate into care and respect for ones mother. For my part, I have started taking care of my mother in all the ways I can. While I do not live with her, I try my best to stay in touch or visit her as much as I can. Taking care of her health and what she wants has become very important for me. It does not matter to me what others do or say about taking care of their mothers. All that matters is what my mother deserves. And that exactly is my message to you all! Do not look at what others do, think of what you can do for your mother, who deserves all the love and respect that one can. Mothers can be your friends too if you learn to share things with her. It is just a misunderstanding that they would not understand you or what you want. You can talk about anything with her: sports, cartoons, TV shows, super heroes, general knowledge, etc. You would be pleasantly surprised when you do end up confiding in her or discussing things with her. I am lucky that I get cards and flowers from my family on Mothers Day. But many things remain left to be desired on the other 364 days of the year. Still whatever my children do the rest of the year, I would never stop caring for and loving them. I guess thats what the motherhood is all about. Happy Mothers Day everyone, but make every day Mothers Day, for she never fails to make everyday special for her children. Published in Dawn, Young World, May 9th, 2020 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Indian elections
Description : THE Islamophobic rhetoric being employed by Narendra Modi for this election campaign has become shrill. Pakistan has nearly always been an electoral issue in India. However, this time, it is Indian Muslims who are bearing the brunt of the Indian prime ministers hate speech. Speaking in Rajasthan last month, he called Muslims infiltrators and said they produce too many children. In Gujarat, where, as chief minister, he had overseen the massacre of Muslims in 2002, he accused the Congress of seeking to loot Indias wealth and redistribute it among Muslims, and of organising a vote jihad against his leadership. Later, he accused the Congress and Muslims of stealing Hindu wealth and property.
Modis inflammatory rhetoric was followed by the BJPs campaign video portraying Muslims as outsiders who plundered Indias wealth. As concerns grew about communal violence, the video was removed. These allegations are a sequel to Modis public referencing of earlier conspiracy theories of love jihad (Muslims forcibly converting Hindu women and marrying them to increase the Muslim population) or land jihad (capturing land to construct religious structures and gaining control of Indias territory). Concerns that his rhetoric might incite further violence against Indian Muslims are increasing. Ordinarily, since Hindus are in a majority in India, it may be difficult to question the rationale of creating a Hindu state. However, two observations are in order. One, the expansionist designs of the cherished Hindu state seek the creation of an Akhand Bharat, a Hindu right fantasy, which would violate the territorial integrity of Nepal, Bangladesh, Pakistan, and Afghanistan, as per a map displayed in the new parliament building. This is not acceptable to the aforementioned independent states. Two, though the creation of a Hindu state should not translate into discrimination against minorities, regrettably this will be the case. The works of French political scientist Christophe Jaffrelot illustrate how Muslims, 14.5 per cent of Indias population, are grossly underrepresented in bureaucracy, the judiciary, police, and legislative organs. They are second-class citizens.
The Muslim-majority area of Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmiri is also being subjected to demographic engineering. The destruction of the centuries-old Babri Masjid by Hindu zealots in 1992 and the construction of a temple in its place has set a precedent that might be followed for other historic mosques. This contrasts sharply with the UAEs gesture of permitting a Hindu temple in Abu Dhabi. Modis anti-Muslim rhetoric is raising concerns of violence. Analysts are also pointing out the fascist tendencies of the BJP regime, a steep decline in democratic values, and a departure from the moorings of pluralism and secularism on which modern India was founded. In her book The Incarcerations, Alpa Shah contends that Modis India is using its national security apparatus to incarcerate ordinary citizens for their dissenting views. Commenting on the book, Arundhati Roy stated that this was about criminalisation and incarceration of dissent itself. Strikingly, the Modi regime has also used art and culture to project the Hindutva philosophy. Kunal Purohits book H-Pop: The Secretive World of Hindutva Pop Stars shows how Hindutva pop stars and influencers are being used to spread the message of Hindu supremacy and create acceptance of Hindutvas core beliefs. Apart from this, Modi is playing on his governments accomplishments: making India the worlds fifth largest economy; the construction of 50,000 kilometres of national highways; boosting Indias military spending; building Vikrant, Indias first domestically built aircraft carrier; and the Chandrayaan-3 moon landing. His prospects of winning a third term have been bolstered by a weak opposition. Despite the formation of the Congress-led 37-party INDIA coalition, there is no real challenge. What has bolstered his outreach is Indias enhanced global standing. In his book Why Bharat Matters, S. Jaishankar presents India as a leader of the global south and makes a case for the rejuvenation of India as a civilisational state.
There are some lessons that Pakistan could learn from Indias electoral process. One, despite the large scale of Indias elections (969 million registered voters; 1m polling stations) and the use of electronic voting machines, election results are largely accepted without much ado. Two, there is no caretaker government, as the incumbents become caretakers in a way, and refrain from announcing major policy decisions or sanctioning expenditure for development schemes. If Modi wins a third term, he is likely to maintain his pro-Hindutva, anti-Muslim, and hegemonic attitude towards regional countries, particularly Pakistan. The write is a former foreign secretary and chairman of Sanober Institute Islamabad. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Who can rock the hybrid boat?
Description : A NUMBER of developments over the past week suggest that the establishment is keen to enforce/ maintain the status quo and the only impediment in its path may be an assertive superior judiciary that has been increasingly finding its feet in recent weeks. If jailed PTI leader and former prime minister Imran Khans article in UKs conservative right-wing Telegraph newspaper blaming the military leadership directly for all his woes the week before was not hint enough of the state of play, two public statements by the latter clarified issues rather unambiguously. The first came in the DG ISPRs press briefing, which was ostensibly called to discuss Afghanistan-based terrorist groups involvement in attacks on Chinese nationals working on development projects in the country. But in response to a couple of questions about the PTI and Imran Khan related to the events of May 9 last year, the DG ISPR stated unequivocally that the only path to rehabilitation for the political party and its leaders was to seek forgiveness for attacking your own forces.
Then, perhaps, talks could happen and that too with political parties (ie, the government), as the military had nothing to do with politics. Imran Khan has been consistent in saying he wouldnt talk to the powerless political parties and that a meaningful dialogue is possible only with the military. The DG ISPR also lamented the delay in the prosecution and sentencing of all those responsible for the May mayhem  including the leaders and mastermind against whom irrefutable evidence has been gathered and submitted  and, in doing so, appeared to hint at the establishments frustrations with what it perceives as roadblocks being erected by the judiciary. The content of the live presser evoked an equally adamant response from the PTI, which went on the offensive, reiterating its stance that May 9 was a false flag operation, accusing the militarys spokesman of being economical with the truth, and saying it would be happy to live with the findings of an impartial judicial commission into the May 9 events and would even apologise if found to be at fault. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. The military spokesman had pre-empted this demand in his briefing earlier by saying if a probe were to happen, as was being demanded, it ought to start with 2014, and not nine years later. The 2014 PTI sit-in in the federal capital was said to have been instigated and backed by the then ISI chief. This was the first indication that the military was prepared to hold its own accountable for past follies, if it paved the way for the trials and sentencing of PTI leaders it says were responsible for the attacks on defence installations in a number of cities in Punjab and KP. While the spokesman left nothing to the imagination, on the first anniversary of May 9, the army chief added his voice to his chief spokesmans in terms of stressing the need for punishing the perpetrators of the violence a year earlier, also lashing out against what he called digital terrorism.
This indicates that harsher curbs on social media are planned. So far, the PTI has had overwhelming social media dominance and had been able to keep a step ahead of its adversaries, but we will find out soon whether it has what it takes to bypass software the Chinese have developed over the years (and Pakistan has reportedly acquired) and successfully used to block dissident content. With this ever-widening gulf between the establishment and the party it once saw as a panacea for all that ails Pakistan, the one thing that many felt could force a rethink in the establishment would have been a public manifestation of the immense support enjoyed by the PTI, as evidenced in last Februarys elections. Many Pakistan watchers keenly waited all day for multitudes of PTI supporters to spill out onto the roads and streets of major urban conurbations on the party leaders call to break the shackles and protest on May 9. But the brutal crackdown of the past one year seems to have knocked the wind out of the partys sails and worn down the workers will. People may turn out to vote for it in droves, but did not appear prepared to risk life, limb and liberty in coming out for mass protests. Some small localised protests did happen, but had zero impact in the sense of influencing decision-making in the corridors of power. Going forward, a couple of factors will play a role in steering developments. The first and foremost will be the confidence the army chief has in his control over his institution. His predecessor appointed a dozen major generals to three stars in his final six weeks in office and left the incumbent little room in terms of forming his own team. Natural attrition and the more dramatic exit of a couple of three stars on disciplinary grounds recently has, 18 months down the line, given the chief an opportunity to place senior officers of his own choosing in key roles which will give him greater freedom of action both inside and outside the institution. The promotion of three officers this week, including the DG ISPR, to three stars was another step in that direction. The military saw May 9 as a coup against the chief, a failed attempt to dislodge him from office. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. With the PTI protests failing to gather momentum, the only impediment in his path seems to be an increasingly assertive superior judiciary. It can and will, in all likelihood, challenge the establishments pre-eminence in decision-making. It isnt clear how the latter plans to deal with that, especially because it believes that a direly needed economic revival is only possible under the umbrella of a hybrid set-up and in a relatively calm political environment. Only the judiciary can rock its boat now. The writer is a former editor of Dawn. abbas.nasir@hotmail.com Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Looming pension crisis cries out for corrective measures
Description : Pension reform is again a hot topic, but this time, bureaucrats will make it appear as if it is intended to benefit top officials. The reforms go beyond just raising the retirement age or taxing pensions. Instead, a series of actions, similar to those that were done in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP), should be seriously considered to reduce the cost of pensions to the government exchequer. The national pension cost will reach nearly Rs2 trillion in FY24, and it is predicted to rise to Rs10tr in the next decade if no reforms are implemented. In 2002-03, the pension cost stood at Rs25 billion, but in a span of just 20 years, it skyrocketed to over Rs1.5tr. Pension reforms have previously been tested in KP and generated the expected cost-saving results. It is high time to rationalise the existing pension programme and transition to more modern schemes available in developing and developed countries. Last week, Finance Minister Muhammad Aurangzeb proposed to raise the retirement age from 60 to 65 years. It has sparked controversy over whether the government intends to benefit only a select few individuals. This decision has both advantages and disadvantages. In KP, the age restriction was raised to 63 years in 2019 with a projected annual savings of Rs20bn. However, the decision was reversed due to strong protest from bureaucrats, and the court also overturned the decision. However, KPs other pension reforms remained in effect. KP Advisor on Finance Muzzammil Aslam has a different take on raising the age restriction than his predecessor, who implemented a series of reforms. Mr Aslam believes that the lump sum payment of pension payments will be delayed for the next five years, providing some breathing room for the time being. This will allow the government to show a lower budget deficit. The net impact will increase when the five-year allowances are added to the basic salary, which will be used to pay the pension. The age extension will postpone payments, but total payouts to employees will climb over the following five years. While these efforts provide some relief in the short term, crucial steps must be implemented to address the increasing pension liabilities. The governments liabilities have jumped from Rs25bn in FY03 to Rs2tr in FY24 There is another idea to tax pensions. It may also face political challenges. However, the KP government has imposed a 5pc pension tax on grades 17 and above on their executive allowance. It is estimated that this measure alone will generate Rs150bn in contributions to a pay-as-you-go pension system. This was not an easy decision, but it was made in KP to obtain some contribution from existing employees. The federal government can look into this step in response to opposition to taxing pensions. KP reforms In 2004, based on recommendations from a World Bank project, the India implemented a national pension scheme wherein employee contributions are matched by the government. Pakistan did not choose to adopt it since it was not anticipated that the cost would rise so dramatically over the next 20 years. Taimur Khan Jhagra, former finance minister of KP, took the lead in implementing a series of pension reforms, including the introduction of a contributory pension scheme for new employees beginning July 1, 2022. Few substantial changes were made to the existing pension programme. A well-known 13-tier pension system was in place, covering the pensioners widow, children, parents, siblings, sisters, and grandchildren. KP confined it to direct dependents. The federal government did the same last year, but other provinces have not followed suit. The previous PTI government raised KP and Punjabs minimum retirement age to 55 from 45, reducing KPs pension bill by Rs20bn alone. KP consolidated various pensions into a single one. Previously, individuals could receive two pensions simultaneously, with an active employee receiving both a salary and a pension. The major reform is the implementation of a contributing pension scheme for new employees. Under this programme, the KP government contributes 12pc and employees contribute 10pc. So far, 40,000 staff have been hired under this system starting July 1, 2022. There are additional critical reforms that the KP and federal governments should implement, such as revisiting the single Universal Pay Scale between Grades 1 and 22. Pay in provinces is decoupled from the Centre and between departments, allowing each department to develop a pay scale appropriate for their budget and the market value of their professions. Pension reforms are greatly needed. The question is whether the state will be able to sustain pension payments for the next 10 to 15 years. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : SMOKERS CORNER: KHAN AND THE GENERALS
Description : In May 2023, a recorded phone call  allegedly between the mother-in-law of the former Chief Justice of Pakistan (CJP) Umar Atta Bandial, and the wife of a lawyer-member of Imran Khans populist Pakistan Tehreek-i-Insaf (PTI)  was leaked on social media. In the call, the two ladies can be heard criticising the coalition government made up of the parties that had ousted Khans regime in April 2022 through an act of parliament. At one point in the leaked conversation, the mother-in-law laments, Yeh kambakht martial law bhi tau nahin lagaatay! [These cursed people dont even impose martial law!] Bykambakht,she meant the military establishment (ME). The conversation was surreal on many levels. Khan had been the blue-eyed boy of the ME, until he had a falling out with his makers. From 2011 till he was elected as prime minister in 2018, the ME had successfully shaped Khans political rise in a highly coordinated manner. His popularity was first established within the rank and file of the military. Then, some TV journalists were brought on board, followed by the induction of some vital members of the judiciary.
This troika  the ME, the electronic media and the judiciary  was complimented by the trained social media wing of Khans PTI to proliferate narratives pitched against the two older mainstream parties, the Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) and the Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP). The two were deeply demonised as being corrupt. After his ouster, Imran Khan was convinced that the establishment had betrayed him, and the May 9-10 protests last year were an attempt to rally support amongst pro-Khan factions in the military. However, any military intervention was drastically overestimated by his supporters A constituency that had initially been built by the former military dictator Gen Pervez Musharraf, and which mostly consisted of middle-class and upper-middle-class Pakistanis, was navigated by the ME and the media in such a manner that it eventually fell in Khans lap. This became a quadrilateral elite, comprising the ME, the media, the judiciary and the middle classes. After Khans ouster in April 2022, he began to publicly lambast the ME, accusing it of betraying him. But the truth is, due to the many abject failures of Khans government, the ME had begun to gradually distance itself from him months before he was ousted. In February 2022, Bandial became the CJP. He was cut from the same cloth that at least four of his predecessors were. These included Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry and, even more so, Justice Saqib Nasir, Justice Asif Khosa and Justice Gulzar Ahmad. Anti-PTI parties often accused them of being overtly pro-Khan. Justice Bandial was accused of having a soft corner for Khan. Truth is, Bandial wasnt very good at hiding this soft corner. Now the question is, during the time of the aforementioned phone call leak, when Khan was holding angry rallies and condemning the ME, why was Bandials mother-in-law yearning for a military takeover? Equally surreal was the presence of banners in some pro-Khan rallies with We Want Martial Law written on them. Also, why did the PTI  by planning last years violent riots on May 9 and 10, in which PTI supporters and members attacked military property  believe that this would cause a split in the armed forces and bring pro-Khan generals to power? Many academics who study coups are of the view that, if the conditions allow, street protests can be followed by a coup detat. According to the political scientist Scott A Tyson, protests are often a signal to the elites to intervene.
The elites in this context are the military and political elites. These may also include the higher judiciary and business elites. A regime facing the protests, too, is made up of political elites. Once the anti-regime elites decide that the protests are clearly signalling for an intervention, this is then communicated to the state elites. The media too plays a role in this. Its reporting of the protests may strengthen the signal and galvanise the military to intervene. The mother-in-laws kambakht lament was expressing a desperate yearning within sections of economic elites for military intervention. This nature of signalling was loud and clear on numerous WhatsApp groups when Khan was holding rallies against his ouster. The signal became even more obvious when the We Want Martial Law banners began to appear at the rallies. Some media personnel also started enhancing the signal to the ME. But by late 2022, the MEs top leadership had changed. A general who had earlier exited the project that was set up to facilitate Khans rise became the new army chief. Yet, PTI believed that many remnants of the project were still active within the military. I believe that with the judiciary still in facilitation mode, the notion of causing a split within the military to replace the new military chief with pro-Khan generals was the brainwave of some retired military men who were well-versed in the theories of post-protest coups. Once the signal to intervene in Khans post-ouster rallies was ignored by the new ME, a violent uprising was conceived that was to target the new ME. The uprising was enacted to evoke the concerns of the supposed pro-Khan generals. The signal now was: eject the new army chief and intervene (on the side of Khan) to avoid an all-out civil war. This plan could not have been formulated without the input of some retired officers. Many of them had been quite vocal in their support for Khan.
The violent May 9 and 10 protests were orchestrated by a political elite (PTI) against another set of elites (the coalition government) to signal the need for an intervention to judicial and military elites. But, according to Tyson, whether or not a coup will succeed is generally not certain to elites. This uncertainty is caused by the uncertainty regarding the actions of other elites. The other elite, in the context of the May 9 and 10 riots, was the military. An intervention by pro-Khan officers was drastically overestimated by the planners and the plan collapsed. The coalition government was able to withstand the assault. The new military chief began to swiftly oust the remaining pro-Khan elements from the military  even though those remaining in the judiciary are now trying to avoid suffering a similar fate through a pushback in the name of the independence of the judiciary.This, too, is quite surreal. Published in Dawn, EOS, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : A turbulent 2023
Description : PAKISTAN faced a tumultuous year in 2023 marked by severe economic distress and a sharp erosion of civil liberties. As documented in the HRCPs annual report, the year was nothing short of a human rights crisis on multiple fronts. Economic hardship was pervasive, with back-breaking inflation  nearly 40pc  and low growth hitting the common citizen the hardest. Protests were widespread, ranging from government employees striking against delayed salaries and pension issues to political demonstrations demanding timely elections. The state responded with indifference and sometimes outright violence, underlining its disregard for the peoples constitutional rights. The political arena was no less strained: the year saw unprecedented violence following the arrest of former prime minister Imran Khan; subsequent PTI-led riots were met with harsh government crackdowns. This included mass arrests and the controversial use of military courts for civilian trials. Political dissent was stifled and freedom of speech curtailed with internet shutdowns and media gags on reporting of certain political leaders. Sadly, the governments management of the turmoil involved significant overreach, impacting judicial independence and skewing the electoral landscape. The swift passage of laws granting sweeping powers to intelligence agencies and restricting media freedoms points to the governments alarming propensity to consolidate power at the cost of transparency and accountability.
Human rights violations were not limited to political suppression. The report highlights severe abuses such as enforced disappearances, alleged extrajudicial killings and custodial torture by state agencies. The societal impact of these policies and actions has been devastating. Moreover, marginalised communities, including women, children, religious minorities, and transgender persons, faced increased violence and discrimination. Notable too was the harsh crackdown on peaceful assemblies like the Baloch Yakjehti Councils protests. On the international front, despite engaging with global human rights mechanisms, Pakistans selective adherence to recommendations concerning enforced disappearances and the use of the death penalty reflected a reluctance to fully align with international human rights standards. Rulers would do well to remember that adhering to those standards will help maintain Pakistans desperately needed GSP-Plus status and be a more inviting place for foreign investment.
As the year proceeds, it is imperative for the state to reconsider its approach to human rights. The government must ensure the independence of the judiciary, respect for democratic processes, and protection for all citizens against the abuse of power. Laws that infringe on freedom of expression and assembly should be reviewed and reformed. Additionally, there should be a concerted effort to address the economic inequalities that underpin much of the social unrest. For a stable and prosperous Pakistan, human rights must be more than an ideal; they must be an integral part of governance and everyday life. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Love knows no boundaries at Karachis Edhi Home nursery for special children
Description : KARACHI: Its one day to Mothers Day and the childrens nursery at the Edhi Home in Mithadar is decorated with balloons and posters along with framed photographs of the late couple Abdul Sattar Edhi and Bilquis Edhi. Children in the classrooms are busy making greeting cards, drawing pictures of themselves and the only woman whom they have come to know as their mother, their Chhoti (younger) Mummy Sabah Faisal Edhi. The duties of the busy mother of so many children, including four of her own, starts from early morning. After tending to her own household duties and sending off her youngest, Moosa Edhi, to school, she is in the nursery at 8am sharp, inquiring from the staff there if everyone had a good sleep, if anyone had any issues during the night. It has become a habit with her to visit the nursery first to inquire about her babies before getting to her other work of calling up the other Edhi Homes and Centres, asking about the other children, their health and school progress, asking about the women in their Homes, tending to the marriage proposals, and adoption procedures and planning outings and picnics for the children. When parents discover their babies are not well, they quietly leave them in our cot, says Sabah Edhi as country celebrates Mothers Day today But today, before she can go inside the nursery, she stops in the playroom to admire three-year-old Fatimas greeting her with a broad smile and a happy dance. Chhoti Mummy hugs the child and gestures to know if she has eaten breakfast. Fatima is deaf and mute. She has only recently been fitted with a cochlear implant, which has enabled her to hear and appreciate music to which she loves to dance. It is quite obvious that Sabahs favourite in the nursery is five-year-old Moosa, named by Mummy, Bilquis Edhi, herself, after her own youngest grandson, Sabah and Faisals youngest son Moosa. But this Moosa, even though he is five, doesnt look more than a year old. His growth is stunted. Sabah lifts him out of his cot and cuddles him lovingly. The nursery only has special children or children with learning disabilities. Moosa was the last child here named by Bilquis Edhi. The rest have been given names by their Chhoti Mummy. There are two newborn baby girls, Aimen and Noor Fatima, peacefully sleeping in their cradles in the cheerful blue nursery. Both the babies are blind. The moment some parents discover that all is not well with their babies they quietly leave them in our cot, says Sabah. They never return for them, she sighs. Parents of very sick children, too, disown them even when they know that their child doesnt have much time to live. We take them in, find them the best of medical care till the last of their breath, she adds. On discovering a child in the cot, we first try to get information about who left him or her there followed by a thorough medical check-up. If they are in need of medical care, we make sure that they receive the best that there is. Just the other day, someone left a little girl suffering from diarrhoea. She had to be hospitalised, she informs. Just then one little girl, of about four years of age, who also looks like she is considerably attached to her Chhoti Mummy walks in and runs up to her. She is normal. There is nothing wrong with this one, Sabah says. She says her name is Manahil. We found her near Sohrab Goth. Most of the children in our Sohrab Goth Centre are much older so I brought her here with me until we can find her parents, she informs. By the grace of God, there is no shortage of space, love and care in this Home built for these children by Edhi Sahab and Mummy, she says, kissing the childs head. All children are a blessing, a priceless gift from God. I wish the parents who discard their children like or neglect them would realise this. I wish such parents could love their special, disabled or sick children like they love their normal children, she says. Sometimes, these very children who they love so much because they are normal and healthy grow up to discard their parents when they are old and weak. Thats the story of so many old people in our homes, she concludes. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Documentary on Dr Aafia Siddiqui launched in Karachi
Description : KARACHI: Aafia Siddiqui  The True Story, a documentary by Friends of Aafia, was launched here at the Karachi Press Club (KPC) on Saturday. The documentary shed light on various aspects of the life of Dr Aafia from her birth, education, marriage and to her kidnapping in Karachi and confinement in a notorious US prison.
View this post on Instagram
Aafias sister Dr Fowzia Siddiqui and Muslim Matters Editor-in-chief Hena Zuberi and others spoke at the event. Dr Fowzia said that her sister Dr Aafia was a gifted child, a bright scholar and a loving and caring person. She got a PhD degree in neurosciences from Brandies University of the US and it was her dream to revolutionise education system in Pakistan. In the documentary, human rights lawyer Clive Stafford Smith, who currently represents Dr Aafia, said a vast majority of the American people had no idea who Dr Aafia was and they also did not care.
He said that she has suffered a lot in the US prison and braved all sorts of torture. El-Hajj Mauri Saalakhan, the founding president and director of operations at The Aafia Foundation, told the documentary makers that after 9/11, the US targeted the human rights and liberties of people, especially Muslims. He said Dr Aafia also fell prey to this victimisation and in 2003 she was kidnapped, along with her children, in Karachi and got disappeared on mere suspicion that her husband had bought online night vision goggles. Umme Muhammad, the president of the Musawemem Campaign, said for the last 15 years she had been linked to the case of Dr Aafia but disappointingly nothing more could be achieved.
She said Dr Aafia was targeted only because she was Muslim. Yvonne Ridley was amongst the first investigative journalists who told the world that Dr Aafia was jailed in Afghanistan. Talking about the grey lady prisoner of Bigram jail, she said in those times the US administration would dehumanise the prisoners and the same was done to Dr Aafia. She was wounded by the US soldiers and in injured condition she was brought to the US and tried by a court in a highly biased manner and jailed for long 86 years, which means the rest of her life. Zeina El-Debis, leader of the Friends of Aafia and founder of the Shade of Mercy Foundation, talked about their efforts to get Dr Aafia repatriated on humanitarian grounds. She said the documentary was also a part of such efforts. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Situationer: Riverine region in the crosshairs of militia violence
Description : DESPITE a year-long anti-dacoit operation in upper Sindhs riverine area, the dacoit factor remains an enigma for the provincial police. The situation took a new turn on May 5 when the Bugtis, allegedly backed by the Punjab police and equipped with military-grade weapons, infiltrated the riverine area of Rwanti in Ghotki, which lies on the Sindh-Punjab border, adding a new layer of complexity to the ongoing operation. The recent incident has once again laid bare the seeming helplessness of the Sindh police, sparking outrage among the provinces intelligentsia. The scourge of dacoits has long plagued parts of northern Sindh, with the governments efforts to eradicate them yielding little success. Despite continued endeavours to tackle the issue, the desired results remain elusive. The Kalpar Bugtis, led by their chief Jalal Kalpar Bugti, claimed to have exacted revenge for the murder of his 30-year-old son, Abdul Rehman Kalpar, by killing two prominent dacoits from the Shar community and injuring half a dozen others. The incident occurred in the Machhko police station area, which falls under the jurisdiction of the Punjab police. The dacoits killed were identified as Alim alias Almo Shar, brother of Sanu Shar, and Hakim alias Haku Shar. Rehman Kalpar was ambushed and killed by dacoits on Feb 13 while he was travelling on the CPEC road in Ghotki district. Jalal Kalpar reached out to the Sindh police, seeking their assistance in avenging his sons murder, according to a senior police officer familiar with the situation. Dacoit issue remains an enigma for Sindh police Jalal Kalpar is unapologetic and straightforward in justifying his actions. I repeatedly reached out to the Ghotki police, but they ignored me. I went to perform Umrah, and upon my return, I was approached by the Punjab police to liaise with them and see how things work, he told Dawn over phone from Sui in Balochistan.
Jalal alleged that Ghotki police SSP Anwar Khetran made excuses, claiming that his force was outgunned by the dacoits, as they only had G-3 and Kalashnikov rifles. However, he added, Mr Khetran did acknowledge that geo-fencing evidence had confirmed the involvement of the Shar community in his sons murder. Punjab police sought help from me in terms of human resource and police would lead the offensive. My men were there as a cover. Finally, Shars were killed in Machko police limits of Punjab. Sindh police didnt do anything in this offence, Jalal alleged. Jalal Kalpar hails from those Bugti families who defied the late Nawab Akbar Bugti and were subsequently displaced from Dera Bugti, settling in Sindh. Following Rehmans killing, Jalal declared at a jirga in Sui that he would hold accountable those responsible, specifically targeting Shaharyar Shar, the chieftain of the Shar clan and a former PTI leader who later joined PPP. In an attempt to defuse the situation, Shar reached out to Jalal to clarify his position and maintain neutrality. Jalal conveyed message to Shaharyar that if Abid Hussain Jatoi, Abid Sundrani, or Gul Mohammad Jakhrani stand surety for him, only then will he talk to him. Only Gul Mohammad agreed, and he, along with Shaharyar, met Kalpar at his Sukkur residence, but names of Rahib Khan Shar and Sana Shar emerged as those responsible for Rehmans murder, a police officer said. Police post as Bugtis base A former SSP of Ghotki said that before the May 5 incident, Bugtis had started arriving in areas along the Sindh-Punjab border. They [Bugtis] wanted Bhaya-4 police post vacated by Sindh police. This post is manned by Ghotki police, but the area falls in Punjabs territorial limits. As they wanted to use this post as their operational base, but didnt find Ghotki police forthcoming in their response, so they turned to Punjab police eventually, said the officer. According to him, the Punjab police permitted the Bugtis to utilise the Camp-2 location, which was situated approximately 800 metres from Sanu Shars hideout. Its an ideal location from which they can confront the Shars comfortably, the officer added. Viral video images revealed that the Bugtis, armed with prohibited and military-grade weapons, disembarked from APCs in the katcha area. The ensuing gun battle, which lasted a couple of days, resulted in the deaths of two Shars and injuries to several others. The Bugtis then departed. According to a former SSP of Shikarpur, the military-grade weapons used were of 82mm dimension, a type commonly seen in Afghanistan. Dangerous precedent Professor Inam Shaikh, an analyst, says, The incident has set a dangerous precedent. He urges the Supreme Court to take suo motu notice. How can state collaborate with private persons? It amounts to creating private militia which otherwise means civil war. Supreme Court must step in to take action against police authorities and criminals for this illegal act, he insists. Naseer Memon, a writer, has analysed the situation from the perspective of good dacoits, bad dacoits and the economy of the katcha area. The recent episode of allowing one tribe to attack another in the katcha area can snowball this crime into a tribal warfare. This can flare up a bloodbath, he says. He believes that a multi-stakeholder economy, operating behind the scenes, drives the dacoits, kidnapping, and ransom industry in upper Sindh. A police official reveals that Rahib Shar has been primarily responsible for the kidnapping of people on the CPEC road and other areas. Meanwhile, Sanu Shar has been running a honey trap industry in the riverine area. According to another police officer, Rahib Shar is residing in Sindhs riverine area, while Sanu Shar is based in Punjabs limits. Actually, there is a strip of riverine land stretching over around 3-4km that falls in Sindh but administratively looked after by Rahim Yar Khan administration. Since Punjab police dont pay heed to this area much and Sindh police also remain inactive, it has become a sort of no mans land and a safe haven for outlaws, claims an SSP from lower Sindh. Bugtis aim to target Shars as a community, while the actual culprits, Rahib Shar and Sanu Shar, remain out of their reach. After the July 28, 2023, killing of notorious dacoits Janu Indher, Soomar Shar, Shahzado Dashti, Nazar Mohammad alias Nazroo alias Kato Shar, and Mubashir alias Mushir Indhar, the Sindh police chief was initially reluctant to take a position. However, the Sindh police later claimed credit for the operation. Meanwhile, the Punjab police also staked their claim. Nevertheless, the Sindh police asserted their right to the head money of Rs8.5 million fixed by the government against Janu, Soomar, and Shahzado. After the Bugtis onslaught on the Shars, Sanu Shar uploaded a video clarifying that he was not involved in Rehmans murder. However, this failed to appease Jalal Kalpar, who has temporarily withdrawn from the area but remains resolute in his vow to take on the Shars until Rehmans murderers are killed. I have no issues with Sindh or the Sindhi people, nor did I have any enmity with the Shars as a community. It is the Ganderi Shars, specifically Sannu, Moriyo, Jamal, and Rahib, who are responsible for my sons murder. So, my quest for vengeance is far from over, he declared. Despite repeated messages and calls, Ghotki SSP Sumair Noor Channa remained unavailable to explain whether criminal cases have been lodged in this regard. Similarly, Rahim Yar Khan SSP Rizwan Gondal did not reply to questions about how Punjab police are backing private militias to take on outlaws. A message was also sent to Sindh IG Ghulam Nabi Memon to get his side of the story, but no contact could be established with him. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Pakistans iCube-Qamar beams back first images from moons orbit
Description : Pakistans inaugural lunar satellite iCube-Qamar on Friday transmitted the first-ever images captured by it from the lunar orbit, the national space agency said. The satellite, part of Chinas Change-6 lunar mission, was launched from the Hainan province on May 3 and had successfully entered the moons orbit at 1:14pm on May 8. The moon is at an average distance of 384,400km from earth. The lunar module was designed by Islamabads Institute of Space Technology (IST) in collaboration with Chinas Shanghai University (SJTU) and Pakistans national space agency Suparco. The landmark images were unveiled at a ceremony organised at the China National Space Agency (CNSA) to mark the successful mission accomplishment, IST spokesperson and head of Department of Electrical and Computer Science, Dr Khurram Khursheed told Dawn.com. They were officially handed over to Pakistans ambassador to Beijing, she added.
View this post on Instagram
One of the first-ever images captured by Pakistans inaugural lunar satellite iCube-Qamar shows the moon and the sun.   Suparco/CNSA
The iCube-Q orbiter carries two optical cameras to image the lunar surface. The module is a cube satellite or cubesat  miniature satellites typically characterised by their small size and standardized cubic design. Due to their compact size and relatively low cost compared to traditional satellites, CubeSats offered opportunities for universities, research institutions and commercial entities to participate in space missions and gather valuable data for scientific advancement and innovation. Operating in extreme temperatures as low as minus 100 degrees Celsius, the satellite features a 7-kilogramme one-megapixel camera tailored for missions with power constraints.
Dr Khursheed had said the satellite would play a critical role in deep space missions. Its surface-level analysis capabilities, transmitting images at a modest 1-kbps, will provide crucial data on crater locations, water, and traces of ice on the moons surface, he had said. As the Chinese lander collects rock and soil samples, iCube-Q will spend three to six months orbiting the moon, capturing and transmitting images of the moon back to Earth. The IST said the opportunity to release the cubesat in lunar orbit from the Change-6 mission was offered by the CNSA through the Asia Pacific Space Cooperation Organisation (Apsco). After a thorough evaluation, Pakistans proposal was accepted out of all Apsco member states.
One of the first-ever images captured by Pakistans inaugural lunar satellite iCube-Qamar shows the sun shining brightly.   Suparco/CNSA
The Change-6 mission, which aims to explore the moons dark side, employs lunar research payloads from multiple countries, including Pakistans iCube-Qamar satellite. The mission is named after the mythical Chinese moon goddess. Nasa is banned by US law from any collaboration, direct or indirect, with China. On Change-6, China is carrying payloads from France, Italy, Sweden and Pakistan, while Change-7 will bear payloads from Russia, Switzerland and Thailand when it launches in 2026.
Change-6 aims to collect around 2kg of lunar samples from the far side of the Moon and bring them back to Earth for analysis. Chinese state news agency Xinhua had hailed it as the first endeavour of its kind in the history of human lunar exploration. China will send a robotic spacecraft in the coming days on a round trip to the moons far side in the first of three technically demanding missions that will pave the way for an inaugural Chinese crewed landing and a base on the lunar south pole. The probe is set to land in the immense South Pole-Aitken Basin, one of the largest known impact craters in the solar system. Once there, it will scoop up lunar soil and rocks, and carry out other experiments in the landing zone. With no direct line of sight with the Earth, Change-6 must rely on a recently deployed relay satellite orbiting the moon during its 53-day mission, including a never-before-attempted ascent from the moons hidden side on its return journey home. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Ruling coalition loses 27 reserved seats in Punjab
Description :  Speaker suspends PML-Ns 23, PPPs two, and one member each of PML-Q, IPP
 Decision announced on point of order raised by PTI-backed SIC leader
 In National Assembly, ruling coalition also likely to lose 23 seats ahead of budget session LAHORE / ISLAMABAD: The ruling coalition in Punjab led by PML-N on Friday lost dozens of reserved seats in the provincial assembly when the speaker suspended 24 women and three minority MPAs elected on reserved seats and barred them from joining the house proceedings. Twenty-three of the suspended MPAs belonged to PML-N, two to PPP and one each to PML-Q and IPP. Speaker Malik Mohammad Ahmed Khan took the decision on a point of order raised a day ago by opposition lawmaker Rana Aftab of PTI-backed Sunni Ittehad Council (SIC) during the house proceedings. The opposition member had argued that the Supreme Court had suspended the decision of the Election Commission of Pakistan (ECP) of allocating the reserved seats of SIC to other parties on the plea that the SIC had neither contested elections nor had submitted a list of nominees for the seats reserved for women and minorities. But Speaker Khan ruled that he had sought opinions of the advocate general as well as the provincial law department and would take a decision only on receiving their reports. Soon after the beginning of house proceedings on Friday, the speaker read out the Supreme Court order and gave the ruling that Rana Aftabs point of order was lawful and suspended the 27 members immediately. When Mr Aftab pointed out that the suspended MPAs had unlawfully voted for the resolution condemning May 9 violence, the chair said he should have raised the issue when the resolution had been put to vote a day ago. The women MPAs suspended were Maqsoodan Bibi, Rubina Nazir, Salma Zahid, Kanwal Nauman, Zeba Ghafoor, Saeeda Samreen Taj, Sheharbano, Amna Parveen, Syed Sumera Ahmed, Uzma Butt, Afshan Hussain, Shagufta Faisal, Nasreen Riaz, Sajida Naveed, Farzana Abbas, Mariya Talal, Tasheen Fawad, Abida Bashir, Saeeda Muzaffar, Faiza Monima, Amera Khan, Samiya Ata, Rahat Afza and Rukhsana Shafiq. The minority MPAs were Tariq Masih Gill, Waseem Anjum, and Basroji. National Assembly After the Supreme Courts decision and the Punjab Assembly speakers action, the ruling coalition in the National Assembly is also set to lose nearly two dozen members ahead of the crucial budget session. President Asif Ali Zardari on Friday summoned the National Assembly session on Monday (May 13) and the SIC members are expected to seek a similar ruling from Speaker Ayaz Sadiq. After allocating reserved seats to the parties in the NA in proportion to the general seats won by them in the Feb 8 elections, the Election Commission of Pakistan (ECP) had withheld the notifications on 23 reserved seats  20 for women and three for minorities  due to the dispute on the allocation of the seats after the decision of the PTI-backed independents to join the SIC. Later, the ECP refused to allocate these seats to the SIC and issued notifications distributing these seats to the parties in the ruling coalition headed by the PML-N. The ECP allocated 15 seats reserved for women to the PML-N, four to PPP and one to the JUI-F. It allocated one seat each reserved for the minorities to the PML-N, the PPP and the MQM-P. As a result, PML-N became the largest party in the NA with 123 seats whereas the tallies of PPP and the JUI-F rose to 73 and 11, respectively. The ECP had also issued notifications on the reserved seats for women and minorities in Punjab and the KP assemblies the same day. The PML-N had initially won a total of 75 general seats and was joined by nine independents. With the allocation of 19 reserved seats for women and four reserved seats for minorities, the number reached 107. However, after the March 5 notifications, the PML-N had been allocated 15 out of the remaining 20 reserved seats for women and one out of the three remaining seats reserved for minorities, taking the partys tally to 123 seats. Likewise, PPP had won 54 general seats and was allocated 12 seats reserved for women and two for minorities. After the allocation of four more seats reserved for women and one for minorities on March 5, the number of the PPP lawmakers is now 73, still fewer than the PTI-backed independents who had joined the SIC hoping to get reserved seats. The MQM-Pakistan has 22 members in the National Assembly, while the number of JUI-F lawmakers had gone up to 11 from seven. The SC decision is expected to have no effect in the composition of the Balochistan Assembly as PTI had not won any seat in the province in the Feb 8 polls. However, in the provincial assembly of Sindh, the two reserved seats for women were given to PPP from the share of the PTI-SIC, which had nine members. KP Assembly The most interesting distribution of reserved seats had been observed in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Assembly, where the PTI-backed independents had won 91 seats compared to just 19 seats secured by all other political parties combined. However, the JUI-F, which could get only seven general seats to stay on top among these political parties, was allocated 10 reserved seats for women. Likewise, the PML-N, which won six general seats, was given eight reserved seats. The PPP, which bagged four general seats, was allocated six reserved seats. The ANP and the PTI-P, which clinched one general seat each, also remained lucky to have their numbers double in the provincial assembly. However, these MPAs in KP Assembly have not yet taken oath as the speaker has refused to call the session. Gwadar killings Meanwhile, the Punjab Assembly during its Fridays sitting adopted a resolution condemning the recent killing of 11 workers belonging to Punjab in Gwadar. The resolution presented by treasury members Amjad Ali Javed demanded the federal government arrest the culprits. It also demanded that the centre announce a compensation package for the heirs of the deceased. South Punjab On a point of order raised by opposition MPA Nadeem Qureshi, Punjab Finance Minister Mujtaba Shuja told the house that the south Punjab secretariat was not being wrapped up; rather the officers who had been promoted were being replaced by new appointments. The minister also rejected the stance that the PML-N was against the development of south Punjab and said that the region had been developed the most when incumbent Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif was the chief minister of Punjab. Published in Dawn, May 11th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Downside risks for Pakistan remain exceptionally high: IMF
Description : Downside risks for the economy remain exceptionally high, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) said on Friday in its staff report ahead of the governments talks with the fund on a longer term progamme. An IMF mission is expected to visit the country this month to discuss a new programme, ahead of the government beginning its annual budget-making process for the next financial year. Downside risks remain exceptionally high. While the new government has indicated its intention to continue the SBAs (standby arrangement) policies, political uncertainty remains significant, said the fund in its staff report following the second and final review under the SBA.
The fund added that political complexities and high cost of living could weigh on policy, adding that policy slippages, together with lower external financing, could undermine the narrow path to debt sustainability and place pressure on the exchange rate. The IMF also said higher commodity prices and disruptions to shipping, or tighter global financial conditions, would also adversely affect external stability for the cash-strapped nation. The fund stressed the need for timely post-programme external financing disbursements.
Last month, the country completed a short-term $3 billion programme, which helped stave off sovereign default, but Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif has stressed the need for a fresh, longer term programme. Pakistan narrowly averted default last summer and the economy has stabilised after the completion of the last IMF programme with inflation coming down to around 17 per cent in April from a record high 38pc last May. The country is still dealing with a high fiscal shortfall and while the external account deficit has been controlled through import control mechanisms, it has come at the expense of stagnating growth, which is expected to be around 2pc this year compared to negative growth last year. Pakistan is expected to seek at least $6bn and request additional financing from the Fund under the Resilience and Sustainability Trust. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Pakistan remain unbeaten in Azlan Shah Cup as match with New Zealand ends in tie
Description : Pakistan on Friday secured a tie in their match against New Zealand in the 30th Azlan Shah Hockey Cup. Pakistans fifth match today, which was played in Malaysias Ipoh city at 1pm (PKT), saw them remain unbeaten throughout the tournament. The match ended in a draw, with both teams securing one point each, the Pakistan Hockey Federation (PHF) said.
View this post on Instagram
Senior player Ammad Shakeel is leading the 18-member squad with Abu Bakr as the vice-captain. Japan lead the points table with 13 points while Pakistan rank second with 11 points. New Zealand hold the third position with seven points while Malaysia follow them with a point less.
View this post on Instagram
According to the PHF, both Pakistan and New Zealand had not scored by half-time. New Zealand then succeeded in scoring a field goal in the 35th minute of the game. However, Abu Bakr amassed a goal for Pakistan in the 43rd minute while playing at the penalty corner. Pakistan and Japan had already qualified for the final match, which will take place at 5:30pm (PKT) on Saturday at the Azlan Shah Stadium in Ipoh, after winning their respective matches on Wednesday. Pakistan had defeated Canada 5-4 while Japan beat hosts Malaysia 2-1. According to Radio Pakistan, Pakistan have won their three matches against Malaysia, South Korea and Canada while the ones against Japan and New Zealand ended in a draw. Meanwhile, after their 3-1 victory against Canada today, Japan have four wins plus a draw. Earlier this month, head coach Roelant Oltmans had said he expected an improved show by Pakistan in the tournament. Oltmans, 69, has served Pakistans senior and junior teams in different roles since 2004 and was involved with the youth side in his most recent stint. Pakistan won the Azlan Shah Cup title thrice  in 1999, 2000 and 2003  and came third in the last edition which was also held in Ipoh in 2022. Malaysia are the defending champions of this years edition. Addressing the squad via video link, Information Minister Attaullah Tarar reiterated the governments commitment to hockey while also mentioning a campaign across all forms of media to highlight the teams achievements in the Azlan Shah Cup, according to a report from state-run Radio Pakistan. He added that the prime minister would focus on removing obstacles in the development of hockey in Pakistan. Tara said final would be broadcast nationwide tomorrow on Saturday and wished the team luck. The entire nation is praying for the victory of Pakistan and is looking forward to welcome a champion team. Rana Mashood Ahmed, chairman of the Prime Ministers Youth Programme, also congratulated the team for reaching the final after thirteen years. He added that Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif would also host the team on its return and address issues impeding hockeys development in the country. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Insurgency and social change
Description : THE recent killing of seven barbershop workers from Punjab in Gwadar is another indicator that the insurgency in Balochistan is evolving and intensifying demographic changes, which will impact the sociopolitical landscape of the province. Although targeted killings of settlers in Balochistan are not a new trend, the emergence of the Balochistan Liberation Army as the primary insurgent group has significantly increased operational capacities and diversified targets.
While the BLA has not officially claimed responsibility for the Gwadar attack, it is likely the act of one of its wings or affiliate groups. Last month, the group carried out a significant attack, killing nine people from central Punjab who were planning on reaching Europe through Iran. Based on their ethnicity, BLA gunmen abducted them from a bus bound for Taftan and later dumped their bodies under a bridge in a hilly area of Noshki. In a similar attack, possibly by the same gunmen, two people were killed when they tried to escape the assailants cordon on N-40, the Quetta-Noshki highway. Following the Noshki attack, the BLA issued a statement claiming that its special squad had killed agents of Pakistans intelligence agencies who, they claimed, were travelling in plain clothes on the bus. However, media reports and investigations later revealed that the victims were using the Balochistan route to travel to Iran and onward to Europe. Baloch militants view workers and travellers from Punjab as collaborators or agents of security forces or the federal government. Attacks targeting Punjabi workers and settlers have occurred in various parts of the province in the past. It appears that the insurgents kill settlers because they are non-combatants and, as such, easy targets. Militant groups assign such tasks to their new recruits to test their conviction and draw them into the cycle of violence. While one can comprehend Baloch grievances against the state institutions and Punjab, it is also crucial to understand why they target non-combatants who have been serving them for years. Whenever anger flares against the states flawed policies, settlers become the targets. Traditionally, Baloch society has a few key professions. Hairdressing is one of the major ones they miss. Teaching comes next, with teachers from Punjab and the Urdu-speaking community making significant contributions to the education sector in the province. Like tribal codes in other parts of the country, the Baloch follow the tradition of hosting members of different ethnicities without integrating them into their tribal ethics. This is a common practice, as assimilation is a long process. The same applies to settlers from Punjab and urban Sindh, who have embraced the norms of Baloch society, while maintaining ties with their native towns and communities.
However, Punjabis constitute the largest ethnic group in the country and wield significant power and resources, leading to resentment not only among the Baloch, but also Pakhtuns and Sindhis. Whenever anger flares against the establishment and the states flawed policies, settlers become the targets of this animosity. Historically, barbers have been the first victims when such hatred triggers violence. It is worth noting that many of these barbers hail from southern Punjab, much of which identifies itself as Baloch, but their official domicile determines their identity and ethnicity. Over the last two decades, Pakhtuns have captured market businesses in urban Balochistan, while Sindhis have gradually become prominent in the labour market. Despite issues of ethnic and tribal pride and sociocultural differences, there has been no hostility towards these communities. This is because both ethnicities are part of Balochistan and share some cultural commonalities. Moreover, both communities have faced major hostility, apart from minor issues related to ethnic and tribal pride and sociocultural differences. The reasons are that both ethnicities are part of Balochistan and share few other cultural commonalities, but both are also seen as deprived communities and, in the past, have remained part of the political struggle for rights. Insurgencies have no room for neutrality or ambiguity, as insurgents seek clear distinctions between friends and foes. In places like Myanmar and India, ethnic insurgents target civilians from minority ethnic groups, as well as engage in property destruction and other abuses. While small ethnic groups may strive to maintain a neutral stance, they often find themselves between insurgents and counterinsurgents in grey areas. This dynamic is evident among Pakhtuns and Sindhis, who have been targeted by insurgents while working on government projects. The contractors had hired them as an alternative to Punjabi labour, but they were not spared despite a sense of affinity with them.
Sociopolitical transformation is a complex phenomenon, which is influenced not only by insurgents but also by internal societal changes. Baloch society is transforming due to rural-to-urban migration, increasing literacy rates, and improved connectivity. Similar to Karachis experience, urbanisation in Quetta is making other major urban centres multi-ethnic too. Despite ethnic bonds with Sindhis, coexistence with Pakhtuns and Sindhis may face occasional challenges. Additionally, religion presents a growing challenge, as religious fervour increases alongside literacy rates among the Baloch. While this may appear advantageous for state institutions seeking cohesion through religion, religiosity has not weakened Balochistans nationalistic sentiments. The promotion of religious organisations and madressahs by state institutions has failed to make a significant impact, mainly due to the vast disparities within Baloch societys tribal, rural, and urban composition, which foster diverse political interests. The very forces undermining peace are now major power players. At the national level, the provinces poor human development and governance indicators leave ample space for resistance politics. Sociopolitical changes often trigger paradoxical sentiments, with simultaneous pro-development and anti-development attitudes emerging. When the sense of deprivation intensifies, and resource distribution becomes contentious, it creates a conducive environment for militants to recruit, expand, and diversify their targets and tactics. Targeting non-combatants of the majority group reflects a deepening societal anger at this level. This is the most crucial level, as the state has to rethink and correct its approach towards Balochistan. The writer is a security analyst. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Overflowing cups
Description : ON my travels in the last two years I noticed a new accessory: large water bottles. You know the ones with the straw protruding from its top? The most coveted one at the moment is the one which retails for around $45  which is roughly Rs12,000, but sells for Rs18,000 in some Karachi markets. This water bottle is a reminder of how our overconsumption is exacerbating the climate crisis. Despite all the evidence, it doesnt feel like a climate crisis when you look at our tendency to buy more  of everything. Plenty has been written about how bulk buying of clothes has accelerated fast fashion culture. These fast-moving trends have a devastating impact on the climate, from labour abuse in the garment industry to microfibres polluting Earth and water. The fashion industry is estimated to be responsible for 10 per cent of global carbon emissions, according to a 2020 report by the European Parliament. Although fashion houses will use terms like sustainable practices, only 1pc of used clothing is recycled into new clothes. The global textile production has doubled from 58 million tonnes in 2010 and is expected to grow to 145m tonnes by 2030, says the European Environment Agency. This is great news for world economies, except that it takes 200 years for some materials to decompose: synthetic fabrics like polyester, for example, break down into small plastic particles which last forever. This should horrify us, but one look at women lining up to buy the new XYZ designer lawn collection across Pakistan proves weve not grasped the severity of the climate crisis. Or care about it. I can sympathise with this, having heard people say how despondent they feel about the state of the  well, state; how change doesnt seem likely, so why care about the environment. My students, however, care very much about the environment, more than politicians do; they are inheriting a planet deluged in waste. But as valiant a generation this Z is proving  defying universitys bullying tactics for example  they are, according to studies, also the most likely to be influenced. Earlier, there was value attached to things and a sensibility too. Against this backdrop, whats the harm in buying a stainless steel cup which comes with a lifetime guarantee? Because it does not stop at one cup. You only have to go to TikTok to see the cupboards lined up with up to 37 different coloured cups of a single brand. People line up outside stores to buy the new release, there are sites dedicated to selling them. This particular company, which catered to blue collar workers in the US, has gone from earning $73m in 2019 to $750m last year, according to Vox. The companys claim, that it can keep cold drinks cold for 11 hours and hot drinks hot for seven hours, received an unlikely boost when, last year, a womans cup survived a car fire. The woman posted a Tik Tok (of course) of her burned-to-a-shell car, but the cup remained in its cup holder, and she rattled it to show the ice was still in it. This was marketing gold for the company, which bought the lady a new car and cup. It is this kind of marketing which adds to a products status and makes it more desirable. And causes a lot of problems for the environment. According to a story in the New York Times, producing one stainless steel water bottle was far more environmentally damaging than producing a plastic bottle. I recognise Im being more judgemental than usual, and while I am loathe to shame people for their choices, Im bothered by what these cups are selling  health as a status symbol. As Vox pointed out, people leave comments saying they are hydrated because of such cups. This idea extends to other wellness products: if you buy these clothes or these classes, you will unlock a better, healthier version of yourself, writes Vox. Health and hydration, like skin care, supplements, yoga pants etc, are part of a self-care trend that only fuels fast capitalism. Our elders were not immune to material acquisition, but there was value attached to things and a sensibility too. Clothes were upcycled, passed onto younger children, handed down as heirlooms even.  Today, it is easy to buy goods from the comfort of your phone, but it is not quenching our desire to want more. This desire is not helping our well-being, because retail therapy, as Time wrote last month, is tanking your mental health. How do we return to a time of stretching the shelf life of things, reusing, recycling, taming the beast in us that wants more irrespective of whether we need it? Simply by buying less, we will see a reduction in emissions and pollution. This is the goal we need to practise and teach our children as their future is at stake.  The writer is an instructor of journalism.  X: LedeingLady Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Hope after defeat
Description : ON Saturday, having fallen behind Japan in the first quarter of the Sultan Azlan Shah Cup final, Pakistan showed powers of recovery to take the lead. But Japan levelled matters and then Pakistan could not hold their nerve in the penalty shootout, losing 4-1 after the match had ended 2-2 in regulation time. Head coach Roeltant Oltmans had said on the eve of the match that it would be a good experience for his youthful side if the final went to a shootout. The hope is that these young men, who have rekindled hopes of hockeys revival in Pakistan, will learn from this and return stronger. Pakistan had reached the final of the Azlan Shah Cup for the first time in 13 years after being unbeaten in the round-robin stage. On their way, Pakistan held New Zealand to a draw. Overall, the teams performance can be a starting point to build upon. Ahead of the final, Oltmans had spoken about the potential of this current lot, whilst also slamming critics in a pointed message to the countrys former Olympians, who have been resentful of a foreign coach being at the helm of the national team. The Dutchman has shown he deserves a longer, more consistent run, instead of being called up tournament after tournament. For that, matters pertaining to the running of the Pakistan Hockey Federation must be settled. The PHF had split into two factions ahead of the Azlan Shah Cup. The governments intervention resolved the dispute at least until the end of the tournament but a final decision is yet to be reached. Pakistan have failed to qualify for the last three Olympics and that woeful run will continue if matters are not resolved. Oltmans and his charges have provided hope, and with the better running of PHF, there is an opportunity for Pakistan to return to its former standing in world hockey. It should not be missed. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Situation in AJK calms down after 2 days of violent clashes
Description : Following violent clashes over the last 48 hours, which left a policeman dead, the situation in Muzaffarabad seemed to have calmed down on Sunday, with a Rangers detachment that was sent to Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK) from Kohala having been withdrawn. AJK witnessed violent clashes between the police and activists of a rights movement amid a wheel-jam and shutter-down strike across the territory on Friday and Saturday, which left at least one police official dead and more than 90 others injured, officials told Dawn.com on Saturday. Mirpur Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP) Kamran Ali had said that Sub-inspector Adnan Qureshi succumbed to a gunshot wound in the chest in the town of Islamgarh, where he was deployed to stop a rally for Muzaffarabad under the banner of the Jammu Kashmir Joint Awami Action Committee (JAAC). The JAAC, which has traders at the forefront in most parts of the state, has been seeking the provision of electricity as per hydropower generation cost in AJK, subsidised wheat flour and an end to the privileges of the elite class. They called for the strike following the arrest of at least 70 of their members in raids on Thursday. Reports emerged in the wake of the protests on Sunday that three Rangers battalions had entered the territory through Kohala and were awaiting further orders. However, AJK Minister for Rural Development Faisal Mumtaz Rathore confirmed that the Rangers, due to the intervention of President Asif Zardari, were called back as soon as they entered Azad Kashmir since the situation had calmed down. Meanwhile, in Islamabad, former prime minister of AJK Sardar Abdul Qayyum Niazi slammed the deployment, calling it a drama and an attempt to score political points. First they send them, then call them back, what is this? the ex-AJK PM said. Those fighting for their rights and engaging in protest are free to do so, but they must remain peaceful, Niazi said in a press conference. He added that they (the protestors) must not give the enemy a chance to sow discord within the territory and create infighting. In a post on Facebook, Rathore acknowledged the public demands for cheap electricity, but admitted that addressing them was out of his hands. The big demand of the people, the demand for cheap electricity and the end of loadshedding, falls under the jurisdiction of the Government of Pakistan, Rathore said. Urging the public to remain peaceful, he said, In this one year [I have been in office], I have never been against the right to peaceful protest and [never] supported violence against people. In the aftermath of the protests, JAAC leader Shaukat Nawaz Mir reiterated that the committee is a peaceful organisation and willing to negotiate with the authorities to ensure the provision of cheap electricity and cheap flour. He also appreciated the withdrawal of the Rangers from the area. We have planned another shutter-down strike, he told reporters on Sunday. We have been peaceful for the last year and always will be a peaceful movement. This territory and its institutions and police are our own. Mir maintained that the JAAC is advocating for the rights of the public in AJK, but it is the bureaucrats who do not understand the publics needs that are doing the damage. The JAAC is peaceful and open to negotiations, Mir added, requesting to be notified by the authorities about decisions taken. We do not want to hurt anyone. He also slammed the federal government for not cutting down spending while at the same time claiming they have no room in the budget to subsidise electricity or flour. The government claims they cant provide cheap electricity and flour because they have no budget, but they have the money for watches and cars, Mir said, adding that the federal government and the prime minister should be ashamed. I dont want my forum to be controversial, Mir said. We are made up of respectable politicians  the local council is standing with us. The JAAC leader added that the movement was successful since members of multiple parties and councils are on our side. Our nation is conscious now. There is no politics here, we just want our rights and identity. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Fight till the last ball, PCB chief tells cricket team in Dublin
Description : Pakistan Cricket Board (PCB) Chairman Mohsin Naqvi on Sunday told the national team to fight till the last ball ahead of the second match of a three-match T20 series against Ireland. As he met players of the mens national team in the Irish capital of Dublin, the PCB quoted him as saying: Fight till the last ball; the competition should be apparent.
On Friday, Ireland recorded their maiden T20 win against Pakistan who could not defend a solid-looking 182-5 after being put in to bat first, dealing a shocking blow to the Babar Azam-led sides preparations for the World Cup, which is taking place next month in the United States. The loss to Ireland, who are in Pakistans group in the T20 World Cup, came after a series draw on home soil to a New Zealand squad missing most of their first-choice players. With Babar only recently reinstated as captain, it was another bump in the road for their tournament preparation.
Todays match will start at 7pm, with Ireland leading the series by 1-0. In a post on X, the PCB shared a video of Naqvi meeting the Green Shirts and speaking to them, adding that a detailed discussion on the action plan took place during the two-hour-long meetup. Encouraging the team, the PCB chairman urged the players to play with hard work, passion and a professional approach. He noted that T20 cricket needed a unique and aggressive approach, adding that victory was only possible if cricket was played in a modern manner. An action plan can be formulated while sitting in a room but the real test is on the ground, where the performance should be visible, the PCB quoted him as telling the team. Naqvi praised all players as undoubtedly talented, professional and the best, adding that the teams bowling attack was splendid. However, he emphasised that great attention was required when fielding so that the opponent cannot get any chance to score. The players are the hope for Pakistan and you have to meet the nations expectations. Teamwork is the fundamental thing for victory, the PCB chairman said. He noted that the public loved cricket and had expectations from the team. Naqvi said that success would come if all 11 of the players in the team performed with unity. No one is accepting the loss in the first match against Ireland. The real test after Ireland and England is the World Cup, he added. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Canada arrests fourth Indian national in killing of Sikh activist
Description : A fourth Indian national was charged by Canadian authorities on Saturday in the 2023 killing of a separatist Sikh leader in Vancouver. Amandeep Singh, 22, was already being held for unrelated gun charges before being charged with first-degree murder and conspiracy to commit murder in the slaying of Hardeep Singh Nijjar. Three other Indian nationals were arrested this month. The killing sparked a diplomatic row between Ottawa and New Delhi when Prime Minister Justin Trudeau linked Indian intelligence to the killing. Nijjar  who immigrated to Canada in 1997 and became a citizen in 2015  had advocated for a separate Sikh state, known as Khalistan, carved out of India. He had been wanted by Indian authorities for alleged terrorism and conspiracy to commit murder  allegations he denied. He was shot dead on June 18, 2023, by masked assailants in the parking lot of the Sikh temple he led in suburban Vancouver. Trudeau announced several months later that Canada had credible allegations connecting Indian intelligence to the slaying. India dismissed the allegations as absurd and responded furiously, briefly curbing visas for Canadians and forcing Ottawa to withdraw diplomats. In November, the US Justice Department charged an Indian citizen living in the Czech Republic with allegedly plotting a similar assassination attempt on American soil. Prosecutors said in unsealed court documents that an Indian government official was also involved in the planning. The shock allegations came after US President Joe Biden hosted Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi for a rare state visit, as Washington seeks closer ties with India against Chinas growing influence. US intelligence agencies have assessed that the plot on American soil was approved by Indias top spy official at the time, Samant Goel, the Washington Post reported in April. Canada is home to some 770,000 Sikhs, who make up about two per cent of the countrys population, with a vocal minority calling for an independent state of Khalistan. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Govt hints at raising wheat purchase target
Description :  Drive to buy 400,000 tonnes of grain kicks off; farmers want wheat procured from across Punjab
 Kissan leader urges govt to ensure official rate of staple, terms proposed subsidy a pittance LAHORE: The Pakistan Agricultural Storage and Services Corporation Limited (Passco) on Saturday began its second phase of wheat procurement from Faisalabad in line with a decision of the federal government to procure 400,000 tonnes more than the original target of 1.4 million tonnes. As he kick-started the second phase, Food Minister Rana Tanveer hinted at the possibility of further increasing the target to facilitate farmers. Passco had originally aimed to purchase 1.4m tonnes, but after farmers started protesting, the pressure on the federal and provincial governments piled on and the premier decided to increase the target to 1.8m tonnes. As of now, Passco has achieved 98 per cent of the initial target and distribution of gunny bags is already underway to meet the increased target. Farmers, however, are not happy with the governments decision to procure slightly more wheat than intended. They said Passco  a federal body  operated in 13 out of 97 tehsils in Punjab and the decision to purchase additional wheat from designated areas would have a negligible impact. According to farmers, the tradeable surplus this year is expected to be about 10m tonnes and buying 400,000 tonnes would hardly make any difference. Punjab, on the other hand, is reluctant to procure wheat from growers despite province-wide agitations and the persistent stance of farmers. This has also caused a significant impact on the price of wheat, with the staple being sold at a rate much lower than the official price of Rs3,900 per 40kg. The Pakistan Kissan Ittehad claimed that farmers had lost Rs1,150 billion under the wheat head alone due to the crashing prices which reportedly dipped below Rs3,000 per 40kg. Instead of procurement, the Punjab government said it would compensate farmers with interest-free loans of Rs150bn. Kissan leader Khalid Mahmood Khokar, however, is not impressed, saying the paltry subsidy came at a cost of Rs1,150bn. Instead of this gimmickry, please ensure an officially declared price, which the provincial government had itself calculated, announced, and promised, Mr Khalid urged the Punjab government. The crisis Pakistan is going through the most difficult wheat season of its history, exacerbated by policy failure and the import of millions of tonnes of wheat shortly before the bumper harvest. The bumper crop followed a record import of 3.5m tonnes by the private sector allegedly due to the weakness of the caretaker regime.
Against the backdrop of such a huge import, hoarders also released their stock to earn profit. The releases of stock by the hoarders and the import of the commodity flooded the market and even met the entire domestic requirement, leaving Passco and the Punjab Food Department with 4m tonnes of unexhausted stock. The 3.5m tonnes imports were staggered in a way, in the name of sustained supplies, that it overlapped with domestic harvesting season and created havoc for the domestic market, explained Muhammad Ramzan, a wheat trader from Lahore. At the start of this month, the Punjab government had promised a probe into the wheat scandal against the backdrop of protests by the farmers. On Friday, the farmers resumed their protests from Multan against the provincial governments decision to not buy wheat from farmers. At the protest, PKI leader Khokhar had said the agitation would continue against the government in every district of the province till the acceptance of their demands. He had said the federal government was procuring the wheat in 16 tehsils of the province, while the Punjab government had not purchased even a single grain so far. Federal government should also buy wheat from other tehsils of the province, he had demanded. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Ruling coalition loses 27 reserved seats in Punjab
Description :  Speaker suspends PML-Ns 23, PPPs two, and one member each of PML-Q, IPP
 Decision announced on point of order raised by PTI-backed SIC leader
 In National Assembly, ruling coalition also likely to lose 23 seats ahead of budget session LAHORE / ISLAMABAD: The ruling coalition in Punjab led by PML-N on Friday lost dozens of reserved seats in the provincial assembly when the speaker suspended 24 women and three minority MPAs elected on reserved seats and barred them from joining the house proceedings. Twenty-three of the suspended MPAs belonged to PML-N, two to PPP and one each to PML-Q and IPP. Speaker Malik Mohammad Ahmed Khan took the decision on a point of order raised a day ago by opposition lawmaker Rana Aftab of PTI-backed Sunni Ittehad Council (SIC) during the house proceedings. The opposition member had argued that the Supreme Court had suspended the decision of the Election Commission of Pakistan (ECP) of allocating the reserved seats of SIC to other parties on the plea that the SIC had neither contested elections nor had submitted a list of nominees for the seats reserved for women and minorities. But Speaker Khan ruled that he had sought opinions of the advocate general as well as the provincial law department and would take a decision only on receiving their reports. Soon after the beginning of house proceedings on Friday, the speaker read out the Supreme Court order and gave the ruling that Rana Aftabs point of order was lawful and suspended the 27 members immediately. When Mr Aftab pointed out that the suspended MPAs had unlawfully voted for the resolution condemning May 9 violence, the chair said he should have raised the issue when the resolution had been put to vote a day ago. The women MPAs suspended were Maqsoodan Bibi, Rubina Nazir, Salma Zahid, Kanwal Nauman, Zeba Ghafoor, Saeeda Samreen Taj, Sheharbano, Amna Parveen, Syed Sumera Ahmed, Uzma Butt, Afshan Hussain, Shagufta Faisal, Nasreen Riaz, Sajida Naveed, Farzana Abbas, Mariya Talal, Tasheen Fawad, Abida Bashir, Saeeda Muzaffar, Faiza Monima, Amera Khan, Samiya Ata, Rahat Afza and Rukhsana Shafiq. The minority MPAs were Tariq Masih Gill, Waseem Anjum, and Basroji. National Assembly After the Supreme Courts decision and the Punjab Assembly speakers action, the ruling coalition in the National Assembly is also set to lose nearly two dozen members ahead of the crucial budget session. President Asif Ali Zardari on Friday summoned the National Assembly session on Monday (May 13) and the SIC members are expected to seek a similar ruling from Speaker Ayaz Sadiq. After allocating reserved seats to the parties in the NA in proportion to the general seats won by them in the Feb 8 elections, the Election Commission of Pakistan (ECP) had withheld the notifications on 23 reserved seats  20 for women and three for minorities  due to the dispute on the allocation of the seats after the decision of the PTI-backed independents to join the SIC. Later, the ECP refused to allocate these seats to the SIC and issued notifications distributing these seats to the parties in the ruling coalition headed by the PML-N. The ECP allocated 15 seats reserved for women to the PML-N, four to PPP and one to the JUI-F. It allocated one seat each reserved for the minorities to the PML-N, the PPP and the MQM-P. As a result, PML-N became the largest party in the NA with 123 seats whereas the tallies of PPP and the JUI-F rose to 73 and 11, respectively. The ECP had also issued notifications on the reserved seats for women and minorities in Punjab and the KP assemblies the same day. The PML-N had initially won a total of 75 general seats and was joined by nine independents. With the allocation of 19 reserved seats for women and four reserved seats for minorities, the number reached 107. However, after the March 5 notifications, the PML-N had been allocated 15 out of the remaining 20 reserved seats for women and one out of the three remaining seats reserved for minorities, taking the partys tally to 123 seats. Likewise, PPP had won 54 general seats and was allocated 12 seats reserved for women and two for minorities. After the allocation of four more seats reserved for women and one for minorities on March 5, the number of the PPP lawmakers is now 73, still fewer than the PTI-backed independents who had joined the SIC hoping to get reserved seats. The MQM-Pakistan has 22 members in the National Assembly, while the number of JUI-F lawmakers had gone up to 11 from seven. The SC decision is expected to have no effect in the composition of the Balochistan Assembly as PTI had not won any seat in the province in the Feb 8 polls. However, in the provincial assembly of Sindh, the two reserved seats for women were given to PPP from the share of the PTI-SIC, which had nine members. KP Assembly The most interesting distribution of reserved seats had been observed in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Assembly, where the PTI-backed independents had won 91 seats compared to just 19 seats secured by all other political parties combined. However, the JUI-F, which could get only seven general seats to stay on top among these political parties, was allocated 10 reserved seats for women. Likewise, the PML-N, which won six general seats, was given eight reserved seats. The PPP, which bagged four general seats, was allocated six reserved seats. The ANP and the PTI-P, which clinched one general seat each, also remained lucky to have their numbers double in the provincial assembly. However, these MPAs in KP Assembly have not yet taken oath as the speaker has refused to call the session. Gwadar killings Meanwhile, the Punjab Assembly during its Fridays sitting adopted a resolution condemning the recent killing of 11 workers belonging to Punjab in Gwadar. The resolution presented by treasury members Amjad Ali Javed demanded the federal government arrest the culprits. It also demanded that the centre announce a compensation package for the heirs of the deceased. South Punjab On a point of order raised by opposition MPA Nadeem Qureshi, Punjab Finance Minister Mujtaba Shuja told the house that the south Punjab secretariat was not being wrapped up; rather the officers who had been promoted were being replaced by new appointments. The minister also rejected the stance that the PML-N was against the development of south Punjab and said that the region had been developed the most when incumbent Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif was the chief minister of Punjab. Published in Dawn, May 11th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Pakistan remain unbeaten in Azlan Shah Cup as match with New Zealand ends in tie
Description : Pakistan on Friday secured a tie in their match against New Zealand in the 30th Azlan Shah Hockey Cup. Pakistans fifth match today, which was played in Malaysias Ipoh city at 1pm (PKT), saw them remain unbeaten throughout the tournament. The match ended in a draw, with both teams securing one point each, the Pakistan Hockey Federation (PHF) said.
View this post on Instagram
Senior player Ammad Shakeel is leading the 18-member squad with Abu Bakr as the vice-captain. Japan lead the points table with 13 points while Pakistan rank second with 11 points. New Zealand hold the third position with seven points while Malaysia follow them with a point less.
View this post on Instagram
According to the PHF, both Pakistan and New Zealand had not scored by half-time. New Zealand then succeeded in scoring a field goal in the 35th minute of the game. However, Abu Bakr amassed a goal for Pakistan in the 43rd minute while playing at the penalty corner. Pakistan and Japan had already qualified for the final match, which will take place at 5:30pm (PKT) on Saturday at the Azlan Shah Stadium in Ipoh, after winning their respective matches on Wednesday. Pakistan had defeated Canada 5-4 while Japan beat hosts Malaysia 2-1. According to Radio Pakistan, Pakistan have won their three matches against Malaysia, South Korea and Canada while the ones against Japan and New Zealand ended in a draw. Meanwhile, after their 3-1 victory against Canada today, Japan have four wins plus a draw. Earlier this month, head coach Roelant Oltmans had said he expected an improved show by Pakistan in the tournament. Oltmans, 69, has served Pakistans senior and junior teams in different roles since 2004 and was involved with the youth side in his most recent stint. Pakistan won the Azlan Shah Cup title thrice  in 1999, 2000 and 2003  and came third in the last edition which was also held in Ipoh in 2022. Malaysia are the defending champions of this years edition. Addressing the squad via video link, Information Minister Attaullah Tarar reiterated the governments commitment to hockey while also mentioning a campaign across all forms of media to highlight the teams achievements in the Azlan Shah Cup, according to a report from state-run Radio Pakistan. He added that the prime minister would focus on removing obstacles in the development of hockey in Pakistan. Tara said final would be broadcast nationwide tomorrow on Saturday and wished the team luck. The entire nation is praying for the victory of Pakistan and is looking forward to welcome a champion team. Rana Mashood Ahmed, chairman of the Prime Ministers Youth Programme, also congratulated the team for reaching the final after thirteen years. He added that Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif would also host the team on its return and address issues impeding hockeys development in the country. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : IMF mission to meet Pakistani authorities next week to discuss next phase of engagement: official
Description : An International Monetary Fund (IMF) mission will meet Pakistani authorities next week to discuss the next phase of engagement, an official from the international money lender said on Sunday. Speaking to Dawn.com, Esther Perez Ruiz, the Funds resident representative for Pakistan, said: A mission team led by Nathan Porter, IMFs mission chief to Pakistan, will meet with authorities next week to discuss the next phase of engagement. The aim is to lay the foundation for better governance and stronger, more inclusive, and resilient economic growth that will benefit all Pakistanis, she added. Pakistan last month completed a short-term $3 billion programme, which helped stave off sovereign default, but the government has stressed the need for a fresh, longer-term programme. Last week, the Fund said that a mission was expected to visit Pakistan this month to discuss the FY25 budget, policies, and reforms under a potential new programme for the welfare of all Pakistanis. Pakistan narrowly averted default last summer, and the $350bn economy has stabilised after the completion of the last IMF programme, with inflation coming down to around 17 per cent in April from a record high 38pc last May. The country is still dealing with a high fiscal shortfall and while the external account deficit has been controlled through import control mechanisms, it has come at the expense of stagnating growth, which is expected to be around 2pc this year compared to negative growth last year. Pakistan is expected to seek at least $6bn and request additional financing from the Fund under the Resilience and Sustainability Trust. On Friday, the Fund said that downside risks for the economy remain exceptionally high. Downside risks remain exceptionally high. While the new government has indicated its intention to continue the SBAs (standby arrangement) policies, political uncertainty remains significant, said the IMF in its staff report following the second and final review under the standby agreement. The Fund added that political complexities and high cost of living could weigh on policy, adding that policy slippages, together with lower external financing, could undermine the narrow path to debt sustainability and place pressure on the exchange rate. The IMF also said higher commodity prices and disruptions to shipping, or tighter global financial conditions, would also adversely affect external stability for the cash-strapped nation. The fund stressed the need for timely post-programme external financing disbursements. Additional input from Reuters Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : No such thing as strategic state-owned enterprises, says Finance Minister Aurangzeb
Description : Finance Minister Muhammad Aurangzeb on Sunday said that there was no such thing as strategic state-owned enterprises (SOEs) as he stressed the need for privatisation. He made the remarks at a pre-budget conference in Lahore, two days after  Deputy Prime Minister Ishaq Dar said the government would limit its business only to strategic and essential SOEs under its domain but their number would be reduced from 40 after scrutiny. Chairing the Cabinet Committee on Privatisation (CCoP) meeting, which was attended by the finance minister, Dar said privatisation of loss-making SOEs would be a priority. The meeting noted that 40 SOEs were currently categorised as strategic or essential, but respective ministries would submit their details to the Cabinet Committee on State-Owned Enterprises (CCoSOE). The CCoSOE will determine the status of the SOEs to be categorised as strategic or essential entities. Speaking on Sunday, Aurangzeb said: There is no such as [a] strategic SOE. Talking about the meeting chaired by Dar on Friday, he continued, We are absolutely on the same wavelength  that there is no such thing as a strategic SOE. The finance minister said that a meeting would be held tomorrow where we will go back to various ministries and say that all this should be handed over to the private sector. There will be public-private partnership and we will accelerate the privatisation agenda, he said. Commenting on concerns regarding the privatisation of Pakistan International Airlines (PIA), Aurangzeb said the government was not just looking at foreign investors. They are local and foreign investors who are bidding [] there is no such thing that we are only looking at foreign investors, he said. Commenting on a fresh loan programme with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) programme, he said that a larger and longer programme was needed to bring permanence in macroeconomic stability and structural reforms. He also talked about energy reforms, saying that there were leakages and stressed the need for stopping theft. He said that changes were being brought to the boards of distribution companies (Discos) in order to bring in those from the private sector for better corporate governance. And then you will see how we bring those Discos towards concessions or privatisation or a combination of both, he emphasised. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Exports to Europe fall despite GSP+
Description : ISLAMABAD: Pakistans exports to European countries declined 6.27 per cent in the first nine months of the current fiscal year. Exports to the European Union states have begun to dip in the current fiscal year despite a GSP+ status that allows most Pakistani goods a duty-free entrance into European markets. In October 2023, the European Parliament unanimously voted to extend the GSP+ status for another four years until 2027 for developing countries, including Pakistan, to enjoy duty-free or minimum duty on exports to Europe. In absolute terms, Pakistans exports to the EU dipped to $6.105bn in 9MFY24 from $6.27bn in the corresponding months of last year. According to figures compiled by the State Bank of Pakistan, the decline was mainly due to reduced demand for Pakistani goods in western, southern, and northern Europe. In FY23, exports to the EU dropped 4.41pc to $8.188bn from $8.566bn in the preceding fiscal year. Western Europe, which includes countries such as Germany, the Netherlands, France, Italy and Belgium, accounts for the largest portion of Pakistans exports to the EU. However, exports to this region have significantly decreased by 12pc. The export value stood at $2.947bn in the first nine months of FY24, down from $3.353bn during the same period last year. While exports to western, southern, and northern Europe have declined, there is a silver lining in the form of an uptick in exports to Eastern Europe. The exports saw an increase of 8.38pc to $466.19m in 9MFY24, up from $430.14m in the corresponding months last year. Exports to southern Europe declined 1.24pc to $2.216bn in 9MFY24 from $2.244bn in the corresponding period last year. In this region, exports to Spain grew 3.73pc to $1.084 in 9MFY24 from $1.045bn last year. Exports to Italy declined 3.22pc to $825.44m in 9MFY24, compared to $852.93 m in the same period last year. However, exports to northern Europe witnessed a 2.31pc dip. The export value to this region stood at $475.92m, down from $487.19m in the corresponding period last year. Before Brexit, Pakistans major export destination was the United Kingdom. In the post-Brexit period, Pakistans exports to the UK slightly went up to $1.529bn in 9MFY24 from $1.494bn over the corresponding period of last year, indicating an increase of 2.34pc. In FY23, Pakistans exports dipped by 10.63pc to $1.966bn to the UK from $2.20bn in the same period of the preceding year. The British government, however, has assured Islamabad that there will be no change in the post-Brexit scenario, as evident from Pakistans inclusion in its preferential market access scheme. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : STYLE; ALL ABOUT MY MOTHER
Description :   An interview with designers Farah Talib Aziz and Maliha Aziz  the mother-daughter duo headlining the eponymous Farah Talib Aziz FTA label  could very well simply be a fashion feature. From a small business helmed by Farah from the basement of her home to the present day, when it is one of the countrys most coveted bridal brands as well as a titan in the lawn market, the story of FTAs rise could be a case study in the business of fashion. But it is also a human story  of how a woman, who was passionate about creating clothes, decided to make it her career when her eldest son left for university abroad. And then how, eventually, her younger daughter and son joined in, designing and strategising and expanding and advertising, until the FTA stores were packed choc-a-bloc with customers on a daily basis. It is a story about the business of fashion, yes, but it also fits like a glove into the theme of Mothers Day being celebrated today. And so, I sit across from Farah Talib Aziz and Maliha Aziz at the FTA flagship store in Karachis Phase 8 DHA commercial zone.  Dressed head-to-toe in FTA formal wear, theyre the classic interviewees for Mothers Day  finishing each others sentences, reminiscing over the same memories, growing older together and also, working together.  Their mutual passion for design binds Farah Talib Aziz and Maliha Aziz together, as does their love for each other.In the case of this particular mother-daughter power pair,we could perhaps also label them number one boss and employee Farah may have created the label 25-odd years ago but Maliha has also, for many years now, been very much the face of the brand, actively involved in the designing process, interacting regularly with the media, and enthusiastically outlining details of every new collection and campaign. Its a partnership that has worked wonders. Ive been in this space several times before and I am not exaggerating when I say that it has always been crowded. Its always shaadi season or Eid season or I-want-to-splurge-out-on-new-clothes season in Karachis it circles, and the ladies that dominate it tend to be FTA aficionados.  Today, for once, the bridal studio on the first floor where we sit is empty although, by the time we wrap up, I realise that customers have been waiting patiently on another floor for the interview to be over. Would your business have grown as much had you not been joined in it by your children, I ask Farah. No, she replies immediately. I have worked very hard, but there are so many different aspects of this work that are now divided between me and my children.  I have always been very vigilant about quality control, scrutinising every design and watching out for errors. But now, the brand extends over so many different genres of design, from bespoke bridals to ready-to-wear to unstitched lawn. It would be difficult to keep an eye on everything if I didnt have my children helping out. If I am ever occupied with one particular thing, I know that I can delegate the rest of my duties to Maliha and Umar [her son, Umar Aziz] and trust them completely. Mom isnt very business savvy, says Maliha. Her strength lies in the creative aspect of design, so it helps that she has people that she trusts working with her. Farah adds, I was very happy functioning from my homes basement. It was Maliha who kept pushing me to expand and diversify. Maliha nods. My mom would keep telling me not to take on too much responsibility by opening a store. I told her that we wouldnt know whether we could manage it unless we gave it a try. Eventually I convinced her to set up an additional workshop. From there, we expanded to a retail store in Karachis E Street, one in Lahore, the studio in DHA Karachi and, most recently, a store in Houston [in the US].   And for the longest time I didnt want to delve into lawn! Farah laughs. My first-ever lawn was created in collaboration with the Lakhany Silk Mills (LSM) group and they had approached me several times and I had refused. Maliha, however, was persistent. I remember that she had just got married at the time and was leaving for a trip abroad. Once she came back, she really got to work on the lawn. It was such a challenge, Maliha says, and it continues to be that way. How do you come up with a design that appeals to someone who is 16, as well as someone who is 60? From the colour to the embroidery patterns, to the print on the dupatta to the materials used  every detail has to be looked into! And we cant even utilise our most popular colours from a year ago, because then customers will think that we have got repetitive. Farah adds, We also have to keep the prices competitive, which is increasingly difficult, because raw materials and the manufacturing process have become so expensive. Was Maliha always inspired by her mothers creative streak?  Always! says Maliha. I remember when we used to go for vacations to the US when we were young, my mother would buy dresses for me and even bedsheets and use them as samples when we got home. A lot of international brands werent available in Pakistan at the time, and so my mum would recreate the designs on her own, adding frills to the bedsheets and stitching pillows. She would also create similar clothes for me. Farah says, I have always loved Eid and I would lay out new bedsheets in all the bedrooms on Eid day. I know how to cut, stitch and embroider, and I would create festive ghararas and shalwar qameez for Maliha. Id add cancans to her frocks and really doll her up   Every mother thinks that her daughter is a doll! Maliha laughs. She even used to embroider my clothes herself. And shed also create pleated skirts with little blazers for me and inspire me by saying, You look just like Lady Diana! Nevertheless, a fashion design business can be a behemoth that is hard to rein in, with responsibilities ranging from implementing the nitty-gritties of design to deciding upon prices and production quantities. Was Maliha inspired enough to want to join her mothers atelier? Yes, she says, I dont think that I can imagine working anywhere else.   Honestly, I dont consider my work difficult, Farah observes. I really enjoy it, and my workers have been with me from the time that I first started out. Initially, I started out with a single embroiderer. Then, I got a tailor on board. Eventually, I had seven embroiderers working with me. Slowly, the team expanded as business grew. Today, they are all like family to me. Has some of the designing now been delegated to Maliha? I do head a design team but, ultimately, everything has to be approved by my mum, she says. Its like preparing for an exam. Even though she has selected the colours and patterns from before, were still very nervous about showing her the final designs. And I can really scold her if I dont like something or there is some flaw in the design, Farah laughs. Maliha herself has two young sons. Does she find it difficult balancing motherhood with the daily rigmarole at FTA?  I think I am lucky that I work with my mother. If ever I am busy, she can take over for me, says Maliha. My elder son is now five and I have pictures of him everywhere in my workplace, him lying in the workshop, playing with scraps of cloth. We have a separate area designated for children and some of the working mothers in our staff bring their children along with them. Also, I live mere minutes away from the FTA studio, and my mother-in-law and husband are very supportive. There are times when I can pick my son from school, make sure that hes had lunch and then return to work for three hours in the evening. There are other times when I am at a shoot that starts at seven in the morning and ends at seven in the evening and I cant leave at any point. It can get difficult and hectic, but I am lucky to have people who support me.  She adds: I support them too! When my husband travels, I take on more responsibilities too. What are the challenges that Maliha faces as a working mother? I think that theres a lot of mum guilt, especially because everything gets posted on social media and you worry that you may not have done enough for your child.  Its an Instagram world and you may have spent an hour decorating a basket for your childs school activity while other parents may have invested an entire day into it. And even though your child is happy, you start fretting that, perhaps, I should have made a better costume, or created a better basket. Also, people judge very quickly. You want to be there for your child but, sometimes, you cant manage a play date thats at 2pm or at 4pm. I dont remember our parents ever facing such pressures. I wonder out loud whether pressures were perhaps different back when Farah started working on her design business. Was she the odd one out at a time when not many women worked? Yes, she says, but I was lucky that my husband was very understanding. Also, I started small and only built up my business over time. Yes, a lot of my friends would constantly be meeting and I wouldnt be able to, because I was at work. I have been very lucky  I love what I do and everyone around me has been very supportive. Maliha seems to have inherited a similar love for the brand. I reminisce about how FTA initially started making waves on social media with the aid of creative campaigns, celebrity collaborations and fun behind-the-scenes (BTS) footage from shoots.  Maliha says: I love marketing, Ive studied it too. We started coming up with BTS content back when very few people were doing it, and I enjoy curating campaigns for new collections. But I do think that what I enjoy the most is the designing process. I know that its important to keep an eye on profits and set targets, but we have people who worry about all this. If I started thinking about finances all the time, I feel that my creativity would suffer. And my mums the same. Like mother, like daughter. A love for design binds Farah Talib Aziz and Maliha Aziz together as does their love for each other. Mothers are usually the number one women in their childrens lives. In the case of this particular mother-daughter power pair, we could perhaps add in number one boss and mentor.  And Maliha can be number one employee. Published in Dawn, ICON, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : No such thing as strategic state-owned enterprises, says Finance Minister Aurangzeb
Description : Finance Minister Muhammad Aurangzeb on Sunday said that there was no such thing as strategic state-owned enterprises (SOEs) as he stressed the need for privatisation. He made the remarks at a pre-budget conference in Lahore, two days after  Deputy Prime Minister Ishaq Dar said the government would limit its business only to strategic and essential SOEs under its domain but their number would be reduced from 40 after scrutiny. Chairing the Cabinet Committee on Privatisation (CCoP) meeting, which was attended by the finance minister, Dar said privatisation of loss-making SOEs would be a priority. The meeting noted that 40 SOEs were currently categorised as strategic or essential, but respective ministries would submit their details to the Cabinet Committee on State-Owned Enterprises (CCoSOE). The CCoSOE will determine the status of the SOEs to be categorised as strategic or essential entities. Speaking on Sunday, Aurangzeb said: There is no such as [a] strategic SOE. Talking about the meeting chaired by Dar on Friday, he continued, We are absolutely on the same wavelength  that there is no such thing as a strategic SOE. The finance minister said that a meeting would be held tomorrow where we will go back to various ministries and say that all this should be handed over to the private sector. There will be public-private partnership and we will accelerate the privatisation agenda, he said. Commenting on concerns regarding the privatisation of Pakistan International Airlines (PIA), Aurangzeb said the government was not just looking at foreign investors. They are local and foreign investors who are bidding [] there is no such thing that we are only looking at foreign investors, he said. Commenting on a fresh loan programme with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) programme, he said that a larger and longer programme was needed to bring permanence in macroeconomic stability and structural reforms. He also talked about energy reforms, saying that there were leakages and stressed the need for stopping theft. He said that changes were being brought to the boards of distribution companies (Discos) in order to bring in those from the private sector for better corporate governance. And then you will see how we bring those Discos towards concessions or privatisation or a combination of both, he emphasised. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : IMF mission to meet Pakistani authorities next week to discuss next phase of engagement: official
Description : An International Monetary Fund (IMF) mission will meet Pakistani authorities next week to discuss the next phase of engagement, an official from the international money lender said on Sunday. Speaking to Dawn.com, Esther Perez Ruiz, the Funds resident representative for Pakistan, said: A mission team led by Nathan Porter, IMFs mission chief to Pakistan, will meet with authorities next week to discuss the next phase of engagement. The aim is to lay the foundation for better governance and stronger, more inclusive, and resilient economic growth that will benefit all Pakistanis, she added. Pakistan last month completed a short-term $3 billion programme, which helped stave off sovereign default, but the government has stressed the need for a fresh, longer-term programme. Last week, the Fund said that a mission was expected to visit Pakistan this month to discuss the FY25 budget, policies, and reforms under a potential new programme for the welfare of all Pakistanis. Pakistan narrowly averted default last summer, and the $350bn economy has stabilised after the completion of the last IMF programme, with inflation coming down to around 17 per cent in April from a record high 38pc last May. The country is still dealing with a high fiscal shortfall and while the external account deficit has been controlled through import control mechanisms, it has come at the expense of stagnating growth, which is expected to be around 2pc this year compared to negative growth last year. Pakistan is expected to seek at least $6bn and request additional financing from the Fund under the Resilience and Sustainability Trust. On Friday, the Fund said that downside risks for the economy remain exceptionally high. Downside risks remain exceptionally high. While the new government has indicated its intention to continue the SBAs (standby arrangement) policies, political uncertainty remains significant, said the IMF in its staff report following the second and final review under the standby agreement. The Fund added that political complexities and high cost of living could weigh on policy, adding that policy slippages, together with lower external financing, could undermine the narrow path to debt sustainability and place pressure on the exchange rate. The IMF also said higher commodity prices and disruptions to shipping, or tighter global financial conditions, would also adversely affect external stability for the cash-strapped nation. The fund stressed the need for timely post-programme external financing disbursements. Additional input from Reuters Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Situation in AJK calms down after 2 days of violent clashes
Description : Following violent clashes over the last 48 hours, which left a policeman dead, the situation in Muzaffarabad seemed to have calmed down on Sunday, with a Rangers detachment that was sent to Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK) from Kohala having been withdrawn. AJK witnessed violent clashes between the police and activists of a rights movement amid a wheel-jam and shutter-down strike across the territory on Friday and Saturday, which left at least one police official dead and more than 90 others injured, officials told Dawn.com on Saturday. Mirpur Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP) Kamran Ali had said that Sub-inspector Adnan Qureshi succumbed to a gunshot wound in the chest in the town of Islamgarh, where he was deployed to stop a rally for Muzaffarabad under the banner of the Jammu Kashmir Joint Awami Action Committee (JAAC). The JAAC, which has traders at the forefront in most parts of the state, has been seeking the provision of electricity as per hydropower generation cost in AJK, subsidised wheat flour and an end to the privileges of the elite class. They called for the strike following the arrest of at least 70 of their members in raids on Thursday. Reports emerged in the wake of the protests on Sunday that three Rangers battalions had entered the territory through Kohala and were awaiting further orders. However, AJK Minister for Rural Development Faisal Mumtaz Rathore confirmed that the Rangers, due to the intervention of President Asif Zardari, were called back as soon as they entered Azad Kashmir since the situation had calmed down. Meanwhile, in Islamabad, former prime minister of AJK Sardar Abdul Qayyum Niazi slammed the deployment, calling it a drama and an attempt to score political points. First they send them, then call them back, what is this? the ex-AJK PM said. Those fighting for their rights and engaging in protest are free to do so, but they must remain peaceful, Niazi said in a press conference. He added that they (the protestors) must not give the enemy a chance to sow discord within the territory and create infighting. In a post on Facebook, Rathore acknowledged the public demands for cheap electricity, but admitted that addressing them was out of his hands. The big demand of the people, the demand for cheap electricity and the end of loadshedding, falls under the jurisdiction of the Government of Pakistan, Rathore said. Urging the public to remain peaceful, he said, In this one year [I have been in office], I have never been against the right to peaceful protest and [never] supported violence against people. In the aftermath of the protests, JAAC leader Shaukat Nawaz Mir reiterated that the committee is a peaceful organisation and willing to negotiate with the authorities to ensure the provision of cheap electricity and cheap flour. He also appreciated the withdrawal of the Rangers from the area. We have planned another shutter-down strike, he told reporters on Sunday. We have been peaceful for the last year and always will be a peaceful movement. This territory and its institutions and police are our own. Mir maintained that the JAAC is advocating for the rights of the public in AJK, but it is the bureaucrats who do not understand the publics needs that are doing the damage. The JAAC is peaceful and open to negotiations, Mir added, requesting to be notified by the authorities about decisions taken. We do not want to hurt anyone. He also slammed the federal government for not cutting down spending while at the same time claiming they have no room in the budget to subsidise electricity or flour. The government claims they cant provide cheap electricity and flour because they have no budget, but they have the money for watches and cars, Mir said, adding that the federal government and the prime minister should be ashamed. I dont want my forum to be controversial, Mir said. We are made up of respectable politicians  the local council is standing with us. The JAAC leader added that the movement was successful since members of multiple parties and councils are on our side. Our nation is conscious now. There is no politics here, we just want our rights and identity. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Fight till the last ball, PCB chief tells cricket team in Dublin
Description : Pakistan Cricket Board (PCB) Chairman Mohsin Naqvi on Sunday told the national team to fight till the last ball ahead of the second match of a three-match T20 series against Ireland. As he met players of the mens national team in the Irish capital of Dublin, the PCB quoted him as saying: Fight till the last ball; the competition should be apparent.
On Friday, Ireland recorded their maiden T20 win against Pakistan who could not defend a solid-looking 182-5 after being put in to bat first, dealing a shocking blow to the Babar Azam-led sides preparations for the World Cup, which is taking place next month in the United States. The loss to Ireland, who are in Pakistans group in the T20 World Cup, came after a series draw on home soil to a New Zealand squad missing most of their first-choice players. With Babar only recently reinstated as captain, it was another bump in the road for their tournament preparation.
Todays match will start at 7pm, with Ireland leading the series by 1-0. In a post on X, the PCB shared a video of Naqvi meeting the Green Shirts and speaking to them, adding that a detailed discussion on the action plan took place during the two-hour-long meetup. Encouraging the team, the PCB chairman urged the players to play with hard work, passion and a professional approach. He noted that T20 cricket needed a unique and aggressive approach, adding that victory was only possible if cricket was played in a modern manner. An action plan can be formulated while sitting in a room but the real test is on the ground, where the performance should be visible, the PCB quoted him as telling the team. Naqvi praised all players as undoubtedly talented, professional and the best, adding that the teams bowling attack was splendid. However, he emphasised that great attention was required when fielding so that the opponent cannot get any chance to score. The players are the hope for Pakistan and you have to meet the nations expectations. Teamwork is the fundamental thing for victory, the PCB chairman said. He noted that the public loved cricket and had expectations from the team. Naqvi said that success would come if all 11 of the players in the team performed with unity. No one is accepting the loss in the first match against Ireland. The real test after Ireland and England is the World Cup, he added. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Canada arrests fourth Indian national in killing of Sikh activist
Description : A fourth Indian national was charged by Canadian authorities on Saturday in the 2023 killing of a separatist Sikh leader in Vancouver. Amandeep Singh, 22, was already being held for unrelated gun charges before being charged with first-degree murder and conspiracy to commit murder in the slaying of Hardeep Singh Nijjar. Three other Indian nationals were arrested this month. The killing sparked a diplomatic row between Ottawa and New Delhi when Prime Minister Justin Trudeau linked Indian intelligence to the killing. Nijjar  who immigrated to Canada in 1997 and became a citizen in 2015  had advocated for a separate Sikh state, known as Khalistan, carved out of India. He had been wanted by Indian authorities for alleged terrorism and conspiracy to commit murder  allegations he denied. He was shot dead on June 18, 2023, by masked assailants in the parking lot of the Sikh temple he led in suburban Vancouver. Trudeau announced several months later that Canada had credible allegations connecting Indian intelligence to the slaying. India dismissed the allegations as absurd and responded furiously, briefly curbing visas for Canadians and forcing Ottawa to withdraw diplomats. In November, the US Justice Department charged an Indian citizen living in the Czech Republic with allegedly plotting a similar assassination attempt on American soil. Prosecutors said in unsealed court documents that an Indian government official was also involved in the planning. The shock allegations came after US President Joe Biden hosted Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi for a rare state visit, as Washington seeks closer ties with India against Chinas growing influence. US intelligence agencies have assessed that the plot on American soil was approved by Indias top spy official at the time, Samant Goel, the Washington Post reported in April. Canada is home to some 770,000 Sikhs, who make up about two per cent of the countrys population, with a vocal minority calling for an independent state of Khalistan. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Second night of auroras seen amid extreme solar storm
Description : Auroras lit up skies across swaths of the planet for the second night in a row on Saturday, after already dazzling Earthlings from the United States to Tasmania to the Bahamas the day before. A powerful solar storm  which could continue into Sunday  has triggered spectacular celestial shows usually confined to the far northern reaches of the planet, hence their nickname of the northern lights. I have the sensation of living through a historic night in France [] It was really charged, with solar particles and emotions, Eric Lagadec, an astrophysicist at the Observatoire de Cote dAzur, wrote on social media after the first night. Find good spots, away from the lights, with a clear view to the north! Late on Saturday evening, pictures again started trickling onto social media as people in the United States reported sightings, though not as strong as Friday nights. The first of several coronal mass ejections (CMEs)  expulsions of plasma and magnetic fields from the Sun   came just after 4pm GMT on Friday, according to the US-based National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)s Space Weather Prediction Center (SWPC). It was later upgraded to an extreme geomagnetic storm   the first since the Halloween Storms of October 2003 that caused blackouts in Sweden and damaged power infrastructure in South Africa. Fridays storm was listed as hitting level five geomagnetic conditions  the highest on the scale. Saturday saw G3 to G5 conditions, with G4 or higher conditions predicted Sunday and G3 conditions possible into Monday. But no major disruptions to power or communications networks appear to have been reported this time around, despite initial worries from authorities. There have only been preliminary reports of power grid irregularities, degradation to high-frequency communications, GPS and possibly satellite navigation, the SWPC said. Elon Musk, whose Starlink satellite internet operator has some 5,000 satellites in low Earth orbit, said his satellites were under a lot of pressure, but holding up so far. However Chinas National Centre for Space Weather issued a red alert on Saturday morning, warning the storm will impact communications and navigation in most areas of the country, state news agency Xinhua reported. Auroras were visible in the northern half of the country, according to media reports. Excitement over the phenomenon   and otherworldly photos of pink, green and purple night skies   popped up across the world, from Mont Saint-Michel on the French coast to Payette, Idaho  in the western United States  to Australias island state of Tasmania.
People pose for photos as a geomagnetic storm lights up the night sky above the Bonneville Salt Flats on May 10 in Wendover, Utah.  AFP
Unlike solar flares, which travel at the speed of light and reach Earth in around eight minutes, CMEs travel at a more sedate pace, with officials putting the current average at 800 kilometres per second. The CMEs emanated from a massive sunspot cluster that is 17 times wider than our planet. People with eclipse glasses can also look for the sunspot cluster during the day. The Sun is approaching the peak of an 11-year cycle that brings heightened activity. NOAAs Brent Gordon encouraged the public to try to capture the night sky with phone cameras even if they couldnt see auroras with their naked eyes. Youd be amazed at what you see in that picture versus what you see with your eyes. Fluctuating magnetic fields associated with geomagnetic storms induce currents in long wires, including power lines, which can potentially lead to blackouts. Long pipelines can also become electrified, leading to engineering problems. Spacecraft are also at risk from high doses of radiation, although the atmosphere prevents this from reaching Earth. NASA has a dedicated team looking into astronaut safety and can ask astronauts on the International Space Station to move to places within the outpost that are better shielded. Even pigeons and other species that have internal biological compasses could be affected. Pigeon handlers have noted a reduction in birds coming home during geomagnetic storms, according to NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The most powerful geomagnetic storm in recorded history, known as the Carrington Event after British astronomer Richard Carrington, occurred in September 1859. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : ADB links support with IMFs clean chit
Description :   Given my interactions with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the dialogue decisiveness of the current government, I feel very hopeful that there will be a successor programme from the Fund, said the Asian Development Banks (ADB) Country Director for Pakistan Yong Ye in an exclusive interview on the sidelines of ADBs 57th Annual Meeting in Tbilisi this week. Tacitly indicating that support from ADB would only be possible with a clean chit from the Fund, Mr Ye expressed cautious optimism for the economy. Highlighting the uncertainties from last year, Mr Ye termed the IMF agreement announced in June as a miracle. Since then, however, he said, the caretaker government did a good job stabilising the economy under the Funds Stand-By Arrangement. More importantly, he added, with the IMF agreement in place, the central banks foreign exchange reserves increased from $4.4 billion to over $9bn in the week ending on May 3. While the country may still be in the ICU, its immediate liquidity crisis has been sorted, and default has been avoided. This has given some confidence to the markets, he said. Record highs of PSX Commenting on the frequent new highs of the Pakistan Stock Exchange (PSX), Mr Ye observed that previously, when the eurobond payment was due, there had been a lot of hype in the media with speculations about whether the country would be able to repay or default. Such pieces did not induce courage and the markets started fluctuating, contributing to a fluctuating exchange rate. Banks top official says Pakistan has sorted out immediate liquidity crisis, but still in ICU This time around, in April, when the $1bn eurobond payment was due, it was paid without fanfare, indicating much better market confidence. Other positive indicators, such as a narrowing external account deficit and recovering remittances, have also improved investor confidence. However, fiscal deficit challenges remain. One major reason behind them is the high interest rate and high debt servicing burden. Act on what you know In my first meeting with Finance Minister Muhammad Aurangzeb, he showed his commitment to implementing and acting on reforms, said Mr Ye. Pakistan does not need more economic prescriptions, he said, agreeing with the finance ministers recent statements. He said the general perception is that Pakistan knows what it needs to do but never does it. Act on what you know needs to be done. He emphasised that the ADB management wants to be with the government in this difficult time. The agency understands the need to ensure that the debt is sustainable rather than an added burden that does not remove the constraints the country is facing. While the economy is recovering, there is still uncertainty moving forward. The removal of this uncertainty depends very much on the governments commitment and ability to implement economic and structural reforms. A special arrangement Mr Ye emphasised the importance of investment in reviving the economy and the role the Special Investment Facilitation Council (SIFC) could play. My understanding of SIFC is that it is a special arrangement to attract foreign direct investment from some targeted countries, he said. From the ADBs point of view, while the SIFC may be a quick short-term solution, Pakistan still needs to look for long-term systematic solutions to attract foreign direct investment. This would require an overall enabling environment with improved regulations and transparency. Given past unsuccessful incidents such as Reko Diq, SIFC, at least in the short run, can demonstrate the countrys potential and ability for investment, which can then be further broadened for other countries. An important element in attracting FDI is the ability of firms to repatriate profit out of the country. At the moment, investors may believe that while earning money in Pakistan is possible, repatriating profits is challenging. Non-productivity of real estate The country needs to increase its revenue and rationalise expenditures, Mr Ye remarked. As an example, he highlights the real estate sector where a lot of savings are invested. The real estate sector is just financial addition with no value addition. If the country invests in its natural resources instead, the country will start rolling, he said. Inflation is on a downward trend, and if this trend continues, the monetary policy rate will come down, Mr Ye opinioned, resulting in a smaller burden of debt servicing and more fiscal room. This will also unlock the investment and borrowing by the private sector, he hoped. Since there is a lot of pent-up investment demand during the period of high interest rates, Pakistan may enter into a boom cycle when the rates start coming down. But for the revival to be sustainable, it all comes back to reforms, he said.  Remaining pledges While ADB was among the institutions that pledged support after the disastrous floods of 2022, almost the entire amount has yet to be disbursed. ADB had pledged about $1.5bn, of which only $108.79 million has been released according to a media report, with a further $340.9m expected this year. In response to why there has been a delay, Mr Ye said that the amount pledged was for reconstruction and that the process cannot be rushed. The damages have to be assessed along with the ground realities, keeping in mind the new climate risk profile and the possibility that these areas may be flooded again, he said. Pointing out that water was still standing in some areas till the start of this year, Mr Ye said that the new climate risk profile needs to be assessed before the feasibility study. Some roads need to be redesigned, followed by the procurement process, contract award, and finally, disbursement. The entire process is lengthy. Mr Ye identified several critical areas for Pakistans long-term economic growth. These include controlling inflation, reducing the fiscal deficit, and diversifying the export base. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Govt hints at raising wheat purchase target
Description :  Drive to buy 400,000 tonnes of grain kicks off; farmers want wheat procured from across Punjab
 Kissan leader urges govt to ensure official rate of staple, terms proposed subsidy a pittance LAHORE: The Pakistan Agricultural Storage and Services Corporation Limited (Passco) on Saturday began its second phase of wheat procurement from Faisalabad in line with a decision of the federal government to procure 400,000 tonnes more than the original target of 1.4 million tonnes. As he kick-started the second phase, Food Minister Rana Tanveer hinted at the possibility of further increasing the target to facilitate farmers. Passco had originally aimed to purchase 1.4m tonnes, but after farmers started protesting, the pressure on the federal and provincial governments piled on and the premier decided to increase the target to 1.8m tonnes. As of now, Passco has achieved 98 per cent of the initial target and distribution of gunny bags is already underway to meet the increased target. Farmers, however, are not happy with the governments decision to procure slightly more wheat than intended. They said Passco  a federal body  operated in 13 out of 97 tehsils in Punjab and the decision to purchase additional wheat from designated areas would have a negligible impact. According to farmers, the tradeable surplus this year is expected to be about 10m tonnes and buying 400,000 tonnes would hardly make any difference. Punjab, on the other hand, is reluctant to procure wheat from growers despite province-wide agitations and the persistent stance of farmers. This has also caused a significant impact on the price of wheat, with the staple being sold at a rate much lower than the official price of Rs3,900 per 40kg. The Pakistan Kissan Ittehad claimed that farmers had lost Rs1,150 billion under the wheat head alone due to the crashing prices which reportedly dipped below Rs3,000 per 40kg. Instead of procurement, the Punjab government said it would compensate farmers with interest-free loans of Rs150bn. Kissan leader Khalid Mahmood Khokar, however, is not impressed, saying the paltry subsidy came at a cost of Rs1,150bn. Instead of this gimmickry, please ensure an officially declared price, which the provincial government had itself calculated, announced, and promised, Mr Khalid urged the Punjab government. The crisis Pakistan is going through the most difficult wheat season of its history, exacerbated by policy failure and the import of millions of tonnes of wheat shortly before the bumper harvest. The bumper crop followed a record import of 3.5m tonnes by the private sector allegedly due to the weakness of the caretaker regime.
Against the backdrop of such a huge import, hoarders also released their stock to earn profit. The releases of stock by the hoarders and the import of the commodity flooded the market and even met the entire domestic requirement, leaving Passco and the Punjab Food Department with 4m tonnes of unexhausted stock. The 3.5m tonnes imports were staggered in a way, in the name of sustained supplies, that it overlapped with domestic harvesting season and created havoc for the domestic market, explained Muhammad Ramzan, a wheat trader from Lahore. At the start of this month, the Punjab government had promised a probe into the wheat scandal against the backdrop of protests by the farmers. On Friday, the farmers resumed their protests from Multan against the provincial governments decision to not buy wheat from farmers. At the protest, PKI leader Khokhar had said the agitation would continue against the government in every district of the province till the acceptance of their demands. He had said the federal government was procuring the wheat in 16 tehsils of the province, while the Punjab government had not purchased even a single grain so far. Federal government should also buy wheat from other tehsils of the province, he had demanded. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : KP governor, CM Gandapur exchange threats in acrid spat
Description : PESHAWAR / DERA ISMAIL KHAN: The acrimony between Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Chief Minister Ali Amin Khan Gandapur and Governor Faisal Karim Kundi intensified on Saturday when the two leaders threatened each other with dire consequences. A day after the governors fiery speech, Chief Minister Gandapur warned Governor Kundi to stay within the limits of his constitutional position and avoid making olitical statements. After appearing in an anti-terrorism court in connection with the murder of former KP law minister Sardar Israrullah Khan Gandapur, the CM who belongs to the PTI said he could use his powers to banish Mr Kundi from Governor House. This Governor House is not your property. Dont force me to  turn it into a museum and open it for the public.
I will shift you to a two-room annexe, said Mr Gandapur. He went on to say that even fuel for the governors official vehicles comes from the budget of the provincial government and threatened to stop it if the governor who belongs to PPP didnt refrain from political statements, below-the-belt remarks and confrontation. Gandapur warns Kundi will be banished from official residence for indulging in politics, confrontation Youre the governor; politics is not your job, Mr Gandapur warned, calling himself the elected representative who came to power with the voters mandate. The CM added that if the governor did not pay heed to his warning, he would seek his removal. [T]he letter which notified you [as governor] will also denotify you. In a hard-hitting speech on Friday, Governor Kundi had indirectly accused the CM of being involved in the killing of former law minister Mr Israrullah and ANP leader Umar Khattab Sherani.
Mr Israrullah was killed in a suicide attack in his hometown of Kulachi near Dera Ismail Khan in October 2013. While government officials blamed the Waziristan-based Gandapur group for the bombing, a little-known shadowy group, Ansarul Mujahideen, claimed responsibility. ANPs Mr Sherani was murdered in December 2021, a day before the provinces local government elections, which he was contesting as a candidate for the post of D.I. Khan mayor. The governor said that if he relinquished his constitutional post, he would prove to be a bigger nemesis for CM Gandapur. Mr Kundi also warned that protecting the Governor House was his constitutional duty and whoever tried to occupy it would be dragged on roads. This was an apparent reply to Mr Gandapurs May 9 statement in which he warned against efforts to impose governors rule in KP and said PTI activists would occupy the Governor House. Want good ties with CM Meanwhile, in conversation with Dawn, Mr Kundi said he hoped for good relations with the chief minister, but whoever talked about occupying the Governor House will be answered befittingly. People of KP shouldnt suffer in the fight between the prime minister, governor and chief minister, he said, advising the provincial government to improve the law and order situation. He recalled the kidnapping of a sessions judge in Tank last month and claimed the chief minister paid extortion money for his release. Expected animosity The acrimonious relationship between the two leaders  both being bitter political rivals hailing from D.I.Khan  was expected since Mr Kundi was nominated for the post by his partys chairman, Bilawal Bhutto-Zardari. The CM expressed his disapproval of the appointment by not attending  Mr Kundis oath-taking ceremony last Saturday. A few days later, on May 8, the governor KP did not sign a summary moved by the provincial government to convene an assembly session, forcing the provincial government to requisition the session through the speaker to present the current fiscal budget, according to sources. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Footprints: the day the city of Karachi went berserk
Description : This article was originally published on May 12, 2017 KARACHI: Attempt after attempt fails to elicit comments from direct witnesses to the carnage that took place in Karachi on May 12 ten years ago. All these men served as judges in the countrys high courts and the apex court before they retired to re-join the legal fraternity as seasoned practitioners of the law. For each of my requests, I receive either excuse me, or sorry. Finally, one of them agrees to talk  but not openly.  Please dont mention my name, says the retired Sindh High Court judge as our conversation ends. You may write each and every word I have shared with you but not my name. I would prefer to be an anonymous source. One never knows here what can happen the next day: its better to stay away from even the memories of such controversial events. The ordeal he recalls of that bloody Saturday refreshes the grim memories of the city being under siege for nearly 24 hours, held hostage by forces in the face of whom even jurists and law-enforcers were helpless.  Two rival rallies had been planned that day  one by the legal fraternity, backed by parties then in the opposition, to welcome into the city the then deposed chief justice, Iftikhar Mohammed Chaudhry, and the other organised by the Muttahida Qaumi Movement (MQM), favoured by the then military dictator General Pervez Musharraf, in protest against the politicisation of the issue of the presidential reference against Mr Chaudhry. A certain level of fear had prevailed, but no one could have guessed the deeply disturbing events that were to follow  certainly not the then serving high court judge. I was travelling with my driver and armed guard to the Sindh High Court where the chief justice had to deliver an address when we were forced to stop near Sir Syed Girls College in Nazimabad, he says.  Armed motorcyclists surrounded his official, flag-bearing car, pulled out his driver and switched off its engine, seizing the keys. The bikers then bludgeoned the stationary car several times, so hard that its bumper fell off. In one of the busiest and most densely populated city neighbourhoods, a serving judge sat in fear.  I talked to them, he says. They were obviously aware that I was a high court judge. After debate and argument, they allowed me to leave but I reminded them that I couldnt because keys of my car had been snatched by one of them. Finally, the key was returned and the judge was allowed to leave. As he got back into his car, the men surrounding him came up with their last strike: they stripped his car of the national flag. At the nearest police station of Pak Colony, he waited for nearly two hours for police security to arrive, as promised by the Governors House after it was informed about the episode. Then came an SSP-ranking officer with his team to escort me, he says. The police left us some two kilometres from the Singh High Court building, saying that they could no longer help us. My driver parked the car at a safer place. Then, with my driver and guard, I walked to the high court to find all entrances blocked. Finally, I jumped over one of the walls to enter the building. If this was the experience of a high court judge, one can only imagine the situation for political workers. In anticipation of the two rallies, law enforcers had been put on high alert the day before. The fire brigade had been directed to remain on standby and hospitals were asked to ready themselves. But the next day, hapless citizens found that the city had been abandoned by the law-enforcement agencies, and armed youths were wandering at will. Nasir Khan, one of the Awami National Party workers, witnessed a few of them at Malir Halt. I meet Nasir almost at the same spot where he narrowly escaped death. As our rally from Quaidabad reached here [Malir Halt], it came under fire, he says. I miraculously remained unhurt but I watched two of my friends die from bullet wounds and several others fell injured. It was a terrible experience and even today I shiver while recalling that day. After 10 years, only eyewitness accounts of the May 12 events remain. Justice and any action on the part of the state are still awaited. Should we call ourselves humanity when the fallen remain un-avenged a year to a day since that fateful day in May? wrote Justice Qazi Faez Isa, a Supreme Court judge and former chief justice of the Balochistan High Court, in this paper in 2008. Years later, the question remains pertinent. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2017  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Mothers Day: Reflections of a mother
Description : This piece was originally published in Dawn, Young World on May 9, 2020. Spending sleepless nights while tending to children, feeding them, changing diapers, etc. are a part of life of every mother having infants. When the infants grow up a little, the next phase is to educate them, teach them manners and make them learn to be a part of the world out there. It is tough to do all that for me, like every other mother. After all it is not all I have to do. One has to focus on ones career and household chores at the same time, and fulfil ones duties towards other family members. Did I mention a me-time somewhere in all that I said? I guess not. There is no mentioning of it simply because there is no time left for me while doing all that I do. It is said that you learn about the true value of parents once you have children of your own. I have found this to be exactly true. The sacrifices and unconditional love it takes to be a mother has certainly made me realise the sacrifices my mother made in bringing me up. Looking back at my life, I wish I could change all those moments in my life when, as a child, I misbehaved with my mother. I also wish that I had spent more time with her and made life easier for her. As my children grow up, they seem to become less obedient and respectful. This really hurts. I see this as a general trend in all the children, nowadays. With some exceptions, the older they get, the less respect they show to their mother and elders in general. Having a mind of ones own is fine, but there cannot be any excuse for bad behaviour towards ones mother. And also just because your mother is less strict and more friendly than your father, it should not lead you to not show respect to her. Mothers like me do not want our children to be our puppets. All we ask for is recognition of our love and efforts. Expecting respectfulness is a part of that recognition. Every mother would love her child to come up to her and, as a minimum, thank her for her efforts. It would be great if the child could offer to help her in little ways. If nothing else, they should at least not leave any mess for the mother to clean up! Mothers Day is important, but it is more than just a special day. It is really a reminder that mothers deserve our respect and recognition for their love at all times. For a child to have this realisation certainly means more to mothers than having a card or flowers on Mothers Day. This is because it means that this realisation would translate into care and respect for ones mother. For my part, I have started taking care of my mother in all the ways I can. While I do not live with her, I try my best to stay in touch or visit her as much as I can. Taking care of her health and what she wants has become very important for me. It does not matter to me what others do or say about taking care of their mothers. All that matters is what my mother deserves. And that exactly is my message to you all! Do not look at what others do, think of what you can do for your mother, who deserves all the love and respect that one can. Mothers can be your friends too if you learn to share things with her. It is just a misunderstanding that they would not understand you or what you want. You can talk about anything with her: sports, cartoons, TV shows, super heroes, general knowledge, etc. You would be pleasantly surprised when you do end up confiding in her or discussing things with her. I am lucky that I get cards and flowers from my family on Mothers Day. But many things remain left to be desired on the other 364 days of the year. Still whatever my children do the rest of the year, I would never stop caring for and loving them. I guess thats what the motherhood is all about. Happy Mothers Day everyone, but make every day Mothers Day, for she never fails to make everyday special for her children. Published in Dawn, Young World, May 9th, 2020 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Indian elections
Description : THE Islamophobic rhetoric being employed by Narendra Modi for this election campaign has become shrill. Pakistan has nearly always been an electoral issue in India. However, this time, it is Indian Muslims who are bearing the brunt of the Indian prime ministers hate speech. Speaking in Rajasthan last month, he called Muslims infiltrators and said they produce too many children. In Gujarat, where, as chief minister, he had overseen the massacre of Muslims in 2002, he accused the Congress of seeking to loot Indias wealth and redistribute it among Muslims, and of organising a vote jihad against his leadership. Later, he accused the Congress and Muslims of stealing Hindu wealth and property.
Modis inflammatory rhetoric was followed by the BJPs campaign video portraying Muslims as outsiders who plundered Indias wealth. As concerns grew about communal violence, the video was removed. These allegations are a sequel to Modis public referencing of earlier conspiracy theories of love jihad (Muslims forcibly converting Hindu women and marrying them to increase the Muslim population) or land jihad (capturing land to construct religious structures and gaining control of Indias territory). Concerns that his rhetoric might incite further violence against Indian Muslims are increasing. Ordinarily, since Hindus are in a majority in India, it may be difficult to question the rationale of creating a Hindu state. However, two observations are in order. One, the expansionist designs of the cherished Hindu state seek the creation of an Akhand Bharat, a Hindu right fantasy, which would violate the territorial integrity of Nepal, Bangladesh, Pakistan, and Afghanistan, as per a map displayed in the new parliament building. This is not acceptable to the aforementioned independent states. Two, though the creation of a Hindu state should not translate into discrimination against minorities, regrettably this will be the case. The works of French political scientist Christophe Jaffrelot illustrate how Muslims, 14.5 per cent of Indias population, are grossly underrepresented in bureaucracy, the judiciary, police, and legislative organs. They are second-class citizens.
The Muslim-majority area of Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmiri is also being subjected to demographic engineering. The destruction of the centuries-old Babri Masjid by Hindu zealots in 1992 and the construction of a temple in its place has set a precedent that might be followed for other historic mosques. This contrasts sharply with the UAEs gesture of permitting a Hindu temple in Abu Dhabi. Modis anti-Muslim rhetoric is raising concerns of violence. Analysts are also pointing out the fascist tendencies of the BJP regime, a steep decline in democratic values, and a departure from the moorings of pluralism and secularism on which modern India was founded. In her book The Incarcerations, Alpa Shah contends that Modis India is using its national security apparatus to incarcerate ordinary citizens for their dissenting views. Commenting on the book, Arundhati Roy stated that this was about criminalisation and incarceration of dissent itself. Strikingly, the Modi regime has also used art and culture to project the Hindutva philosophy. Kunal Purohits book H-Pop: The Secretive World of Hindutva Pop Stars shows how Hindutva pop stars and influencers are being used to spread the message of Hindu supremacy and create acceptance of Hindutvas core beliefs. Apart from this, Modi is playing on his governments accomplishments: making India the worlds fifth largest economy; the construction of 50,000 kilometres of national highways; boosting Indias military spending; building Vikrant, Indias first domestically built aircraft carrier; and the Chandrayaan-3 moon landing. His prospects of winning a third term have been bolstered by a weak opposition. Despite the formation of the Congress-led 37-party INDIA coalition, there is no real challenge. What has bolstered his outreach is Indias enhanced global standing. In his book Why Bharat Matters, S. Jaishankar presents India as a leader of the global south and makes a case for the rejuvenation of India as a civilisational state.
There are some lessons that Pakistan could learn from Indias electoral process. One, despite the large scale of Indias elections (969 million registered voters; 1m polling stations) and the use of electronic voting machines, election results are largely accepted without much ado. Two, there is no caretaker government, as the incumbents become caretakers in a way, and refrain from announcing major policy decisions or sanctioning expenditure for development schemes. If Modi wins a third term, he is likely to maintain his pro-Hindutva, anti-Muslim, and hegemonic attitude towards regional countries, particularly Pakistan. The write is a former foreign secretary and chairman of Sanober Institute Islamabad. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Who can rock the hybrid boat?
Description : A NUMBER of developments over the past week suggest that the establishment is keen to enforce/ maintain the status quo and the only impediment in its path may be an assertive superior judiciary that has been increasingly finding its feet in recent weeks. If jailed PTI leader and former prime minister Imran Khans article in UKs conservative right-wing Telegraph newspaper blaming the military leadership directly for all his woes the week before was not hint enough of the state of play, two public statements by the latter clarified issues rather unambiguously. The first came in the DG ISPRs press briefing, which was ostensibly called to discuss Afghanistan-based terrorist groups involvement in attacks on Chinese nationals working on development projects in the country. But in response to a couple of questions about the PTI and Imran Khan related to the events of May 9 last year, the DG ISPR stated unequivocally that the only path to rehabilitation for the political party and its leaders was to seek forgiveness for attacking your own forces.
Then, perhaps, talks could happen and that too with political parties (ie, the government), as the military had nothing to do with politics. Imran Khan has been consistent in saying he wouldnt talk to the powerless political parties and that a meaningful dialogue is possible only with the military. The DG ISPR also lamented the delay in the prosecution and sentencing of all those responsible for the May mayhem  including the leaders and mastermind against whom irrefutable evidence has been gathered and submitted  and, in doing so, appeared to hint at the establishments frustrations with what it perceives as roadblocks being erected by the judiciary. The content of the live presser evoked an equally adamant response from the PTI, which went on the offensive, reiterating its stance that May 9 was a false flag operation, accusing the militarys spokesman of being economical with the truth, and saying it would be happy to live with the findings of an impartial judicial commission into the May 9 events and would even apologise if found to be at fault. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. The military spokesman had pre-empted this demand in his briefing earlier by saying if a probe were to happen, as was being demanded, it ought to start with 2014, and not nine years later. The 2014 PTI sit-in in the federal capital was said to have been instigated and backed by the then ISI chief. This was the first indication that the military was prepared to hold its own accountable for past follies, if it paved the way for the trials and sentencing of PTI leaders it says were responsible for the attacks on defence installations in a number of cities in Punjab and KP. While the spokesman left nothing to the imagination, on the first anniversary of May 9, the army chief added his voice to his chief spokesmans in terms of stressing the need for punishing the perpetrators of the violence a year earlier, also lashing out against what he called digital terrorism.
This indicates that harsher curbs on social media are planned. So far, the PTI has had overwhelming social media dominance and had been able to keep a step ahead of its adversaries, but we will find out soon whether it has what it takes to bypass software the Chinese have developed over the years (and Pakistan has reportedly acquired) and successfully used to block dissident content. With this ever-widening gulf between the establishment and the party it once saw as a panacea for all that ails Pakistan, the one thing that many felt could force a rethink in the establishment would have been a public manifestation of the immense support enjoyed by the PTI, as evidenced in last Februarys elections. Many Pakistan watchers keenly waited all day for multitudes of PTI supporters to spill out onto the roads and streets of major urban conurbations on the party leaders call to break the shackles and protest on May 9. But the brutal crackdown of the past one year seems to have knocked the wind out of the partys sails and worn down the workers will. People may turn out to vote for it in droves, but did not appear prepared to risk life, limb and liberty in coming out for mass protests. Some small localised protests did happen, but had zero impact in the sense of influencing decision-making in the corridors of power. Going forward, a couple of factors will play a role in steering developments. The first and foremost will be the confidence the army chief has in his control over his institution. His predecessor appointed a dozen major generals to three stars in his final six weeks in office and left the incumbent little room in terms of forming his own team. Natural attrition and the more dramatic exit of a couple of three stars on disciplinary grounds recently has, 18 months down the line, given the chief an opportunity to place senior officers of his own choosing in key roles which will give him greater freedom of action both inside and outside the institution. The promotion of three officers this week, including the DG ISPR, to three stars was another step in that direction. The military saw May 9 as a coup against the chief, a failed attempt to dislodge him from office. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. With the PTI protests failing to gather momentum, the only impediment in his path seems to be an increasingly assertive superior judiciary. It can and will, in all likelihood, challenge the establishments pre-eminence in decision-making. It isnt clear how the latter plans to deal with that, especially because it believes that a direly needed economic revival is only possible under the umbrella of a hybrid set-up and in a relatively calm political environment. Only the judiciary can rock its boat now. The writer is a former editor of Dawn. abbas.nasir@hotmail.com Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Looming pension crisis cries out for corrective measures
Description : Pension reform is again a hot topic, but this time, bureaucrats will make it appear as if it is intended to benefit top officials. The reforms go beyond just raising the retirement age or taxing pensions. Instead, a series of actions, similar to those that were done in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP), should be seriously considered to reduce the cost of pensions to the government exchequer. The national pension cost will reach nearly Rs2 trillion in FY24, and it is predicted to rise to Rs10tr in the next decade if no reforms are implemented. In 2002-03, the pension cost stood at Rs25 billion, but in a span of just 20 years, it skyrocketed to over Rs1.5tr. Pension reforms have previously been tested in KP and generated the expected cost-saving results. It is high time to rationalise the existing pension programme and transition to more modern schemes available in developing and developed countries. Last week, Finance Minister Muhammad Aurangzeb proposed to raise the retirement age from 60 to 65 years. It has sparked controversy over whether the government intends to benefit only a select few individuals. This decision has both advantages and disadvantages. In KP, the age restriction was raised to 63 years in 2019 with a projected annual savings of Rs20bn. However, the decision was reversed due to strong protest from bureaucrats, and the court also overturned the decision. However, KPs other pension reforms remained in effect. KP Advisor on Finance Muzzammil Aslam has a different take on raising the age restriction than his predecessor, who implemented a series of reforms. Mr Aslam believes that the lump sum payment of pension payments will be delayed for the next five years, providing some breathing room for the time being. This will allow the government to show a lower budget deficit. The net impact will increase when the five-year allowances are added to the basic salary, which will be used to pay the pension. The age extension will postpone payments, but total payouts to employees will climb over the following five years. While these efforts provide some relief in the short term, crucial steps must be implemented to address the increasing pension liabilities. The governments liabilities have jumped from Rs25bn in FY03 to Rs2tr in FY24 There is another idea to tax pensions. It may also face political challenges. However, the KP government has imposed a 5pc pension tax on grades 17 and above on their executive allowance. It is estimated that this measure alone will generate Rs150bn in contributions to a pay-as-you-go pension system. This was not an easy decision, but it was made in KP to obtain some contribution from existing employees. The federal government can look into this step in response to opposition to taxing pensions. KP reforms In 2004, based on recommendations from a World Bank project, the India implemented a national pension scheme wherein employee contributions are matched by the government. Pakistan did not choose to adopt it since it was not anticipated that the cost would rise so dramatically over the next 20 years. Taimur Khan Jhagra, former finance minister of KP, took the lead in implementing a series of pension reforms, including the introduction of a contributory pension scheme for new employees beginning July 1, 2022. Few substantial changes were made to the existing pension programme. A well-known 13-tier pension system was in place, covering the pensioners widow, children, parents, siblings, sisters, and grandchildren. KP confined it to direct dependents. The federal government did the same last year, but other provinces have not followed suit. The previous PTI government raised KP and Punjabs minimum retirement age to 55 from 45, reducing KPs pension bill by Rs20bn alone. KP consolidated various pensions into a single one. Previously, individuals could receive two pensions simultaneously, with an active employee receiving both a salary and a pension. The major reform is the implementation of a contributing pension scheme for new employees. Under this programme, the KP government contributes 12pc and employees contribute 10pc. So far, 40,000 staff have been hired under this system starting July 1, 2022. There are additional critical reforms that the KP and federal governments should implement, such as revisiting the single Universal Pay Scale between Grades 1 and 22. Pay in provinces is decoupled from the Centre and between departments, allowing each department to develop a pay scale appropriate for their budget and the market value of their professions. Pension reforms are greatly needed. The question is whether the state will be able to sustain pension payments for the next 10 to 15 years. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : SMOKERS CORNER: KHAN AND THE GENERALS
Description : In May 2023, a recorded phone call  allegedly between the mother-in-law of the former Chief Justice of Pakistan (CJP) Umar Atta Bandial, and the wife of a lawyer-member of Imran Khans populist Pakistan Tehreek-i-Insaf (PTI)  was leaked on social media. In the call, the two ladies can be heard criticising the coalition government made up of the parties that had ousted Khans regime in April 2022 through an act of parliament. At one point in the leaked conversation, the mother-in-law laments, Yeh kambakht martial law bhi tau nahin lagaatay! [These cursed people dont even impose martial law!] Bykambakht,she meant the military establishment (ME). The conversation was surreal on many levels. Khan had been the blue-eyed boy of the ME, until he had a falling out with his makers. From 2011 till he was elected as prime minister in 2018, the ME had successfully shaped Khans political rise in a highly coordinated manner. His popularity was first established within the rank and file of the military. Then, some TV journalists were brought on board, followed by the induction of some vital members of the judiciary.
This troika  the ME, the electronic media and the judiciary  was complimented by the trained social media wing of Khans PTI to proliferate narratives pitched against the two older mainstream parties, the Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) and the Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP). The two were deeply demonised as being corrupt. After his ouster, Imran Khan was convinced that the establishment had betrayed him, and the May 9-10 protests last year were an attempt to rally support amongst pro-Khan factions in the military. However, any military intervention was drastically overestimated by his supporters A constituency that had initially been built by the former military dictator Gen Pervez Musharraf, and which mostly consisted of middle-class and upper-middle-class Pakistanis, was navigated by the ME and the media in such a manner that it eventually fell in Khans lap. This became a quadrilateral elite, comprising the ME, the media, the judiciary and the middle classes. After Khans ouster in April 2022, he began to publicly lambast the ME, accusing it of betraying him. But the truth is, due to the many abject failures of Khans government, the ME had begun to gradually distance itself from him months before he was ousted. In February 2022, Bandial became the CJP. He was cut from the same cloth that at least four of his predecessors were. These included Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry and, even more so, Justice Saqib Nasir, Justice Asif Khosa and Justice Gulzar Ahmad. Anti-PTI parties often accused them of being overtly pro-Khan. Justice Bandial was accused of having a soft corner for Khan. Truth is, Bandial wasnt very good at hiding this soft corner. Now the question is, during the time of the aforementioned phone call leak, when Khan was holding angry rallies and condemning the ME, why was Bandials mother-in-law yearning for a military takeover? Equally surreal was the presence of banners in some pro-Khan rallies with We Want Martial Law written on them. Also, why did the PTI  by planning last years violent riots on May 9 and 10, in which PTI supporters and members attacked military property  believe that this would cause a split in the armed forces and bring pro-Khan generals to power? Many academics who study coups are of the view that, if the conditions allow, street protests can be followed by a coup detat. According to the political scientist Scott A Tyson, protests are often a signal to the elites to intervene.
The elites in this context are the military and political elites. These may also include the higher judiciary and business elites. A regime facing the protests, too, is made up of political elites. Once the anti-regime elites decide that the protests are clearly signalling for an intervention, this is then communicated to the state elites. The media too plays a role in this. Its reporting of the protests may strengthen the signal and galvanise the military to intervene. The mother-in-laws kambakht lament was expressing a desperate yearning within sections of economic elites for military intervention. This nature of signalling was loud and clear on numerous WhatsApp groups when Khan was holding rallies against his ouster. The signal became even more obvious when the We Want Martial Law banners began to appear at the rallies. Some media personnel also started enhancing the signal to the ME. But by late 2022, the MEs top leadership had changed. A general who had earlier exited the project that was set up to facilitate Khans rise became the new army chief. Yet, PTI believed that many remnants of the project were still active within the military. I believe that with the judiciary still in facilitation mode, the notion of causing a split within the military to replace the new military chief with pro-Khan generals was the brainwave of some retired military men who were well-versed in the theories of post-protest coups. Once the signal to intervene in Khans post-ouster rallies was ignored by the new ME, a violent uprising was conceived that was to target the new ME. The uprising was enacted to evoke the concerns of the supposed pro-Khan generals. The signal now was: eject the new army chief and intervene (on the side of Khan) to avoid an all-out civil war. This plan could not have been formulated without the input of some retired officers. Many of them had been quite vocal in their support for Khan.
The violent May 9 and 10 protests were orchestrated by a political elite (PTI) against another set of elites (the coalition government) to signal the need for an intervention to judicial and military elites. But, according to Tyson, whether or not a coup will succeed is generally not certain to elites. This uncertainty is caused by the uncertainty regarding the actions of other elites. The other elite, in the context of the May 9 and 10 riots, was the military. An intervention by pro-Khan officers was drastically overestimated by the planners and the plan collapsed. The coalition government was able to withstand the assault. The new military chief began to swiftly oust the remaining pro-Khan elements from the military  even though those remaining in the judiciary are now trying to avoid suffering a similar fate through a pushback in the name of the independence of the judiciary.This, too, is quite surreal. Published in Dawn, EOS, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : A turbulent 2023
Description : PAKISTAN faced a tumultuous year in 2023 marked by severe economic distress and a sharp erosion of civil liberties. As documented in the HRCPs annual report, the year was nothing short of a human rights crisis on multiple fronts. Economic hardship was pervasive, with back-breaking inflation  nearly 40pc  and low growth hitting the common citizen the hardest. Protests were widespread, ranging from government employees striking against delayed salaries and pension issues to political demonstrations demanding timely elections. The state responded with indifference and sometimes outright violence, underlining its disregard for the peoples constitutional rights. The political arena was no less strained: the year saw unprecedented violence following the arrest of former prime minister Imran Khan; subsequent PTI-led riots were met with harsh government crackdowns. This included mass arrests and the controversial use of military courts for civilian trials. Political dissent was stifled and freedom of speech curtailed with internet shutdowns and media gags on reporting of certain political leaders. Sadly, the governments management of the turmoil involved significant overreach, impacting judicial independence and skewing the electoral landscape. The swift passage of laws granting sweeping powers to intelligence agencies and restricting media freedoms points to the governments alarming propensity to consolidate power at the cost of transparency and accountability.
Human rights violations were not limited to political suppression. The report highlights severe abuses such as enforced disappearances, alleged extrajudicial killings and custodial torture by state agencies. The societal impact of these policies and actions has been devastating. Moreover, marginalised communities, including women, children, religious minorities, and transgender persons, faced increased violence and discrimination. Notable too was the harsh crackdown on peaceful assemblies like the Baloch Yakjehti Councils protests. On the international front, despite engaging with global human rights mechanisms, Pakistans selective adherence to recommendations concerning enforced disappearances and the use of the death penalty reflected a reluctance to fully align with international human rights standards. Rulers would do well to remember that adhering to those standards will help maintain Pakistans desperately needed GSP-Plus status and be a more inviting place for foreign investment.
As the year proceeds, it is imperative for the state to reconsider its approach to human rights. The government must ensure the independence of the judiciary, respect for democratic processes, and protection for all citizens against the abuse of power. Laws that infringe on freedom of expression and assembly should be reviewed and reformed. Additionally, there should be a concerted effort to address the economic inequalities that underpin much of the social unrest. For a stable and prosperous Pakistan, human rights must be more than an ideal; they must be an integral part of governance and everyday life. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Love knows no boundaries at Karachis Edhi Home nursery for special children
Description : KARACHI: Its one day to Mothers Day and the childrens nursery at the Edhi Home in Mithadar is decorated with balloons and posters along with framed photographs of the late couple Abdul Sattar Edhi and Bilquis Edhi. Children in the classrooms are busy making greeting cards, drawing pictures of themselves and the only woman whom they have come to know as their mother, their Chhoti (younger) Mummy Sabah Faisal Edhi. The duties of the busy mother of so many children, including four of her own, starts from early morning. After tending to her own household duties and sending off her youngest, Moosa Edhi, to school, she is in the nursery at 8am sharp, inquiring from the staff there if everyone had a good sleep, if anyone had any issues during the night. It has become a habit with her to visit the nursery first to inquire about her babies before getting to her other work of calling up the other Edhi Homes and Centres, asking about the other children, their health and school progress, asking about the women in their Homes, tending to the marriage proposals, and adoption procedures and planning outings and picnics for the children. When parents discover their babies are not well, they quietly leave them in our cot, says Sabah Edhi as country celebrates Mothers Day today But today, before she can go inside the nursery, she stops in the playroom to admire three-year-old Fatimas greeting her with a broad smile and a happy dance. Chhoti Mummy hugs the child and gestures to know if she has eaten breakfast. Fatima is deaf and mute. She has only recently been fitted with a cochlear implant, which has enabled her to hear and appreciate music to which she loves to dance. It is quite obvious that Sabahs favourite in the nursery is five-year-old Moosa, named by Mummy, Bilquis Edhi, herself, after her own youngest grandson, Sabah and Faisals youngest son Moosa. But this Moosa, even though he is five, doesnt look more than a year old. His growth is stunted. Sabah lifts him out of his cot and cuddles him lovingly. The nursery only has special children or children with learning disabilities. Moosa was the last child here named by Bilquis Edhi. The rest have been given names by their Chhoti Mummy. There are two newborn baby girls, Aimen and Noor Fatima, peacefully sleeping in their cradles in the cheerful blue nursery. Both the babies are blind. The moment some parents discover that all is not well with their babies they quietly leave them in our cot, says Sabah. They never return for them, she sighs. Parents of very sick children, too, disown them even when they know that their child doesnt have much time to live. We take them in, find them the best of medical care till the last of their breath, she adds. On discovering a child in the cot, we first try to get information about who left him or her there followed by a thorough medical check-up. If they are in need of medical care, we make sure that they receive the best that there is. Just the other day, someone left a little girl suffering from diarrhoea. She had to be hospitalised, she informs. Just then one little girl, of about four years of age, who also looks like she is considerably attached to her Chhoti Mummy walks in and runs up to her. She is normal. There is nothing wrong with this one, Sabah says. She says her name is Manahil. We found her near Sohrab Goth. Most of the children in our Sohrab Goth Centre are much older so I brought her here with me until we can find her parents, she informs. By the grace of God, there is no shortage of space, love and care in this Home built for these children by Edhi Sahab and Mummy, she says, kissing the childs head. All children are a blessing, a priceless gift from God. I wish the parents who discard their children like or neglect them would realise this. I wish such parents could love their special, disabled or sick children like they love their normal children, she says. Sometimes, these very children who they love so much because they are normal and healthy grow up to discard their parents when they are old and weak. Thats the story of so many old people in our homes, she concludes. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Documentary on Dr Aafia Siddiqui launched in Karachi
Description : KARACHI: Aafia Siddiqui  The True Story, a documentary by Friends of Aafia, was launched here at the Karachi Press Club (KPC) on Saturday. The documentary shed light on various aspects of the life of Dr Aafia from her birth, education, marriage and to her kidnapping in Karachi and confinement in a notorious US prison.
View this post on Instagram
Aafias sister Dr Fowzia Siddiqui and Muslim Matters Editor-in-chief Hena Zuberi and others spoke at the event. Dr Fowzia said that her sister Dr Aafia was a gifted child, a bright scholar and a loving and caring person. She got a PhD degree in neurosciences from Brandies University of the US and it was her dream to revolutionise education system in Pakistan. In the documentary, human rights lawyer Clive Stafford Smith, who currently represents Dr Aafia, said a vast majority of the American people had no idea who Dr Aafia was and they also did not care.
He said that she has suffered a lot in the US prison and braved all sorts of torture. El-Hajj Mauri Saalakhan, the founding president and director of operations at The Aafia Foundation, told the documentary makers that after 9/11, the US targeted the human rights and liberties of people, especially Muslims. He said Dr Aafia also fell prey to this victimisation and in 2003 she was kidnapped, along with her children, in Karachi and got disappeared on mere suspicion that her husband had bought online night vision goggles. Umme Muhammad, the president of the Musawemem Campaign, said for the last 15 years she had been linked to the case of Dr Aafia but disappointingly nothing more could be achieved.
She said Dr Aafia was targeted only because she was Muslim. Yvonne Ridley was amongst the first investigative journalists who told the world that Dr Aafia was jailed in Afghanistan. Talking about the grey lady prisoner of Bigram jail, she said in those times the US administration would dehumanise the prisoners and the same was done to Dr Aafia. She was wounded by the US soldiers and in injured condition she was brought to the US and tried by a court in a highly biased manner and jailed for long 86 years, which means the rest of her life. Zeina El-Debis, leader of the Friends of Aafia and founder of the Shade of Mercy Foundation, talked about their efforts to get Dr Aafia repatriated on humanitarian grounds. She said the documentary was also a part of such efforts. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Situationer: Riverine region in the crosshairs of militia violence
Description : DESPITE a year-long anti-dacoit operation in upper Sindhs riverine area, the dacoit factor remains an enigma for the provincial police. The situation took a new turn on May 5 when the Bugtis, allegedly backed by the Punjab police and equipped with military-grade weapons, infiltrated the riverine area of Rwanti in Ghotki, which lies on the Sindh-Punjab border, adding a new layer of complexity to the ongoing operation. The recent incident has once again laid bare the seeming helplessness of the Sindh police, sparking outrage among the provinces intelligentsia. The scourge of dacoits has long plagued parts of northern Sindh, with the governments efforts to eradicate them yielding little success. Despite continued endeavours to tackle the issue, the desired results remain elusive. The Kalpar Bugtis, led by their chief Jalal Kalpar Bugti, claimed to have exacted revenge for the murder of his 30-year-old son, Abdul Rehman Kalpar, by killing two prominent dacoits from the Shar community and injuring half a dozen others. The incident occurred in the Machhko police station area, which falls under the jurisdiction of the Punjab police. The dacoits killed were identified as Alim alias Almo Shar, brother of Sanu Shar, and Hakim alias Haku Shar. Rehman Kalpar was ambushed and killed by dacoits on Feb 13 while he was travelling on the CPEC road in Ghotki district. Jalal Kalpar reached out to the Sindh police, seeking their assistance in avenging his sons murder, according to a senior police officer familiar with the situation. Dacoit issue remains an enigma for Sindh police Jalal Kalpar is unapologetic and straightforward in justifying his actions. I repeatedly reached out to the Ghotki police, but they ignored me. I went to perform Umrah, and upon my return, I was approached by the Punjab police to liaise with them and see how things work, he told Dawn over phone from Sui in Balochistan.
Jalal alleged that Ghotki police SSP Anwar Khetran made excuses, claiming that his force was outgunned by the dacoits, as they only had G-3 and Kalashnikov rifles. However, he added, Mr Khetran did acknowledge that geo-fencing evidence had confirmed the involvement of the Shar community in his sons murder. Punjab police sought help from me in terms of human resource and police would lead the offensive. My men were there as a cover. Finally, Shars were killed in Machko police limits of Punjab. Sindh police didnt do anything in this offence, Jalal alleged. Jalal Kalpar hails from those Bugti families who defied the late Nawab Akbar Bugti and were subsequently displaced from Dera Bugti, settling in Sindh. Following Rehmans killing, Jalal declared at a jirga in Sui that he would hold accountable those responsible, specifically targeting Shaharyar Shar, the chieftain of the Shar clan and a former PTI leader who later joined PPP. In an attempt to defuse the situation, Shar reached out to Jalal to clarify his position and maintain neutrality. Jalal conveyed message to Shaharyar that if Abid Hussain Jatoi, Abid Sundrani, or Gul Mohammad Jakhrani stand surety for him, only then will he talk to him. Only Gul Mohammad agreed, and he, along with Shaharyar, met Kalpar at his Sukkur residence, but names of Rahib Khan Shar and Sana Shar emerged as those responsible for Rehmans murder, a police officer said. Police post as Bugtis base A former SSP of Ghotki said that before the May 5 incident, Bugtis had started arriving in areas along the Sindh-Punjab border. They [Bugtis] wanted Bhaya-4 police post vacated by Sindh police. This post is manned by Ghotki police, but the area falls in Punjabs territorial limits. As they wanted to use this post as their operational base, but didnt find Ghotki police forthcoming in their response, so they turned to Punjab police eventually, said the officer. According to him, the Punjab police permitted the Bugtis to utilise the Camp-2 location, which was situated approximately 800 metres from Sanu Shars hideout. Its an ideal location from which they can confront the Shars comfortably, the officer added. Viral video images revealed that the Bugtis, armed with prohibited and military-grade weapons, disembarked from APCs in the katcha area. The ensuing gun battle, which lasted a couple of days, resulted in the deaths of two Shars and injuries to several others. The Bugtis then departed. According to a former SSP of Shikarpur, the military-grade weapons used were of 82mm dimension, a type commonly seen in Afghanistan. Dangerous precedent Professor Inam Shaikh, an analyst, says, The incident has set a dangerous precedent. He urges the Supreme Court to take suo motu notice. How can state collaborate with private persons? It amounts to creating private militia which otherwise means civil war. Supreme Court must step in to take action against police authorities and criminals for this illegal act, he insists. Naseer Memon, a writer, has analysed the situation from the perspective of good dacoits, bad dacoits and the economy of the katcha area. The recent episode of allowing one tribe to attack another in the katcha area can snowball this crime into a tribal warfare. This can flare up a bloodbath, he says. He believes that a multi-stakeholder economy, operating behind the scenes, drives the dacoits, kidnapping, and ransom industry in upper Sindh. A police official reveals that Rahib Shar has been primarily responsible for the kidnapping of people on the CPEC road and other areas. Meanwhile, Sanu Shar has been running a honey trap industry in the riverine area. According to another police officer, Rahib Shar is residing in Sindhs riverine area, while Sanu Shar is based in Punjabs limits. Actually, there is a strip of riverine land stretching over around 3-4km that falls in Sindh but administratively looked after by Rahim Yar Khan administration. Since Punjab police dont pay heed to this area much and Sindh police also remain inactive, it has become a sort of no mans land and a safe haven for outlaws, claims an SSP from lower Sindh. Bugtis aim to target Shars as a community, while the actual culprits, Rahib Shar and Sanu Shar, remain out of their reach. After the July 28, 2023, killing of notorious dacoits Janu Indher, Soomar Shar, Shahzado Dashti, Nazar Mohammad alias Nazroo alias Kato Shar, and Mubashir alias Mushir Indhar, the Sindh police chief was initially reluctant to take a position. However, the Sindh police later claimed credit for the operation. Meanwhile, the Punjab police also staked their claim. Nevertheless, the Sindh police asserted their right to the head money of Rs8.5 million fixed by the government against Janu, Soomar, and Shahzado. After the Bugtis onslaught on the Shars, Sanu Shar uploaded a video clarifying that he was not involved in Rehmans murder. However, this failed to appease Jalal Kalpar, who has temporarily withdrawn from the area but remains resolute in his vow to take on the Shars until Rehmans murderers are killed. I have no issues with Sindh or the Sindhi people, nor did I have any enmity with the Shars as a community. It is the Ganderi Shars, specifically Sannu, Moriyo, Jamal, and Rahib, who are responsible for my sons murder. So, my quest for vengeance is far from over, he declared. Despite repeated messages and calls, Ghotki SSP Sumair Noor Channa remained unavailable to explain whether criminal cases have been lodged in this regard. Similarly, Rahim Yar Khan SSP Rizwan Gondal did not reply to questions about how Punjab police are backing private militias to take on outlaws. A message was also sent to Sindh IG Ghulam Nabi Memon to get his side of the story, but no contact could be established with him. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Pakistans iCube-Qamar beams back first images from moons orbit
Description : Pakistans inaugural lunar satellite iCube-Qamar on Friday transmitted the first-ever images captured by it from the lunar orbit, the national space agency said. The satellite, part of Chinas Change-6 lunar mission, was launched from the Hainan province on May 3 and had successfully entered the moons orbit at 1:14pm on May 8. The moon is at an average distance of 384,400km from earth. The lunar module was designed by Islamabads Institute of Space Technology (IST) in collaboration with Chinas Shanghai University (SJTU) and Pakistans national space agency Suparco. The landmark images were unveiled at a ceremony organised at the China National Space Agency (CNSA) to mark the successful mission accomplishment, IST spokesperson and head of Department of Electrical and Computer Science, Dr Khurram Khursheed told Dawn.com. They were officially handed over to Pakistans ambassador to Beijing, she added.
View this post on Instagram
One of the first-ever images captured by Pakistans inaugural lunar satellite iCube-Qamar shows the moon and the sun.   Suparco/CNSA
The iCube-Q orbiter carries two optical cameras to image the lunar surface. The module is a cube satellite or cubesat  miniature satellites typically characterised by their small size and standardized cubic design. Due to their compact size and relatively low cost compared to traditional satellites, CubeSats offered opportunities for universities, research institutions and commercial entities to participate in space missions and gather valuable data for scientific advancement and innovation. Operating in extreme temperatures as low as minus 100 degrees Celsius, the satellite features a 7-kilogramme one-megapixel camera tailored for missions with power constraints.
Dr Khursheed had said the satellite would play a critical role in deep space missions. Its surface-level analysis capabilities, transmitting images at a modest 1-kbps, will provide crucial data on crater locations, water, and traces of ice on the moons surface, he had said. As the Chinese lander collects rock and soil samples, iCube-Q will spend three to six months orbiting the moon, capturing and transmitting images of the moon back to Earth. The IST said the opportunity to release the cubesat in lunar orbit from the Change-6 mission was offered by the CNSA through the Asia Pacific Space Cooperation Organisation (Apsco). After a thorough evaluation, Pakistans proposal was accepted out of all Apsco member states.
One of the first-ever images captured by Pakistans inaugural lunar satellite iCube-Qamar shows the sun shining brightly.   Suparco/CNSA
The Change-6 mission, which aims to explore the moons dark side, employs lunar research payloads from multiple countries, including Pakistans iCube-Qamar satellite. The mission is named after the mythical Chinese moon goddess. Nasa is banned by US law from any collaboration, direct or indirect, with China. On Change-6, China is carrying payloads from France, Italy, Sweden and Pakistan, while Change-7 will bear payloads from Russia, Switzerland and Thailand when it launches in 2026.
Change-6 aims to collect around 2kg of lunar samples from the far side of the Moon and bring them back to Earth for analysis. Chinese state news agency Xinhua had hailed it as the first endeavour of its kind in the history of human lunar exploration. China will send a robotic spacecraft in the coming days on a round trip to the moons far side in the first of three technically demanding missions that will pave the way for an inaugural Chinese crewed landing and a base on the lunar south pole. The probe is set to land in the immense South Pole-Aitken Basin, one of the largest known impact craters in the solar system. Once there, it will scoop up lunar soil and rocks, and carry out other experiments in the landing zone. With no direct line of sight with the Earth, Change-6 must rely on a recently deployed relay satellite orbiting the moon during its 53-day mission, including a never-before-attempted ascent from the moons hidden side on its return journey home. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Ruling coalition loses 27 reserved seats in Punjab
Description :  Speaker suspends PML-Ns 23, PPPs two, and one member each of PML-Q, IPP
 Decision announced on point of order raised by PTI-backed SIC leader
 In National Assembly, ruling coalition also likely to lose 23 seats ahead of budget session LAHORE / ISLAMABAD: The ruling coalition in Punjab led by PML-N on Friday lost dozens of reserved seats in the provincial assembly when the speaker suspended 24 women and three minority MPAs elected on reserved seats and barred them from joining the house proceedings. Twenty-three of the suspended MPAs belonged to PML-N, two to PPP and one each to PML-Q and IPP. Speaker Malik Mohammad Ahmed Khan took the decision on a point of order raised a day ago by opposition lawmaker Rana Aftab of PTI-backed Sunni Ittehad Council (SIC) during the house proceedings. The opposition member had argued that the Supreme Court had suspended the decision of the Election Commission of Pakistan (ECP) of allocating the reserved seats of SIC to other parties on the plea that the SIC had neither contested elections nor had submitted a list of nominees for the seats reserved for women and minorities. But Speaker Khan ruled that he had sought opinions of the advocate general as well as the provincial law department and would take a decision only on receiving their reports. Soon after the beginning of house proceedings on Friday, the speaker read out the Supreme Court order and gave the ruling that Rana Aftabs point of order was lawful and suspended the 27 members immediately. When Mr Aftab pointed out that the suspended MPAs had unlawfully voted for the resolution condemning May 9 violence, the chair said he should have raised the issue when the resolution had been put to vote a day ago. The women MPAs suspended were Maqsoodan Bibi, Rubina Nazir, Salma Zahid, Kanwal Nauman, Zeba Ghafoor, Saeeda Samreen Taj, Sheharbano, Amna Parveen, Syed Sumera Ahmed, Uzma Butt, Afshan Hussain, Shagufta Faisal, Nasreen Riaz, Sajida Naveed, Farzana Abbas, Mariya Talal, Tasheen Fawad, Abida Bashir, Saeeda Muzaffar, Faiza Monima, Amera Khan, Samiya Ata, Rahat Afza and Rukhsana Shafiq. The minority MPAs were Tariq Masih Gill, Waseem Anjum, and Basroji. National Assembly After the Supreme Courts decision and the Punjab Assembly speakers action, the ruling coalition in the National Assembly is also set to lose nearly two dozen members ahead of the crucial budget session. President Asif Ali Zardari on Friday summoned the National Assembly session on Monday (May 13) and the SIC members are expected to seek a similar ruling from Speaker Ayaz Sadiq. After allocating reserved seats to the parties in the NA in proportion to the general seats won by them in the Feb 8 elections, the Election Commission of Pakistan (ECP) had withheld the notifications on 23 reserved seats  20 for women and three for minorities  due to the dispute on the allocation of the seats after the decision of the PTI-backed independents to join the SIC. Later, the ECP refused to allocate these seats to the SIC and issued notifications distributing these seats to the parties in the ruling coalition headed by the PML-N. The ECP allocated 15 seats reserved for women to the PML-N, four to PPP and one to the JUI-F. It allocated one seat each reserved for the minorities to the PML-N, the PPP and the MQM-P. As a result, PML-N became the largest party in the NA with 123 seats whereas the tallies of PPP and the JUI-F rose to 73 and 11, respectively. The ECP had also issued notifications on the reserved seats for women and minorities in Punjab and the KP assemblies the same day. The PML-N had initially won a total of 75 general seats and was joined by nine independents. With the allocation of 19 reserved seats for women and four reserved seats for minorities, the number reached 107. However, after the March 5 notifications, the PML-N had been allocated 15 out of the remaining 20 reserved seats for women and one out of the three remaining seats reserved for minorities, taking the partys tally to 123 seats. Likewise, PPP had won 54 general seats and was allocated 12 seats reserved for women and two for minorities. After the allocation of four more seats reserved for women and one for minorities on March 5, the number of the PPP lawmakers is now 73, still fewer than the PTI-backed independents who had joined the SIC hoping to get reserved seats. The MQM-Pakistan has 22 members in the National Assembly, while the number of JUI-F lawmakers had gone up to 11 from seven. The SC decision is expected to have no effect in the composition of the Balochistan Assembly as PTI had not won any seat in the province in the Feb 8 polls. However, in the provincial assembly of Sindh, the two reserved seats for women were given to PPP from the share of the PTI-SIC, which had nine members. KP Assembly The most interesting distribution of reserved seats had been observed in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Assembly, where the PTI-backed independents had won 91 seats compared to just 19 seats secured by all other political parties combined. However, the JUI-F, which could get only seven general seats to stay on top among these political parties, was allocated 10 reserved seats for women. Likewise, the PML-N, which won six general seats, was given eight reserved seats. The PPP, which bagged four general seats, was allocated six reserved seats. The ANP and the PTI-P, which clinched one general seat each, also remained lucky to have their numbers double in the provincial assembly. However, these MPAs in KP Assembly have not yet taken oath as the speaker has refused to call the session. Gwadar killings Meanwhile, the Punjab Assembly during its Fridays sitting adopted a resolution condemning the recent killing of 11 workers belonging to Punjab in Gwadar. The resolution presented by treasury members Amjad Ali Javed demanded the federal government arrest the culprits. It also demanded that the centre announce a compensation package for the heirs of the deceased. South Punjab On a point of order raised by opposition MPA Nadeem Qureshi, Punjab Finance Minister Mujtaba Shuja told the house that the south Punjab secretariat was not being wrapped up; rather the officers who had been promoted were being replaced by new appointments. The minister also rejected the stance that the PML-N was against the development of south Punjab and said that the region had been developed the most when incumbent Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif was the chief minister of Punjab. Published in Dawn, May 11th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : PIA staff forgets to put boys body on plane
Description :
SKARDU: Officials of PIA, the Civil Aviation Authority and police try to placate the protesting father of the deceased.Photo by the writer
GILGIT: In a heart-wrenching incident, a PIA flight from Islamabad to Skardu left behind the body of a six-year-old boy at the capitals airport on Friday, while his parents continued their journey, unaware of the shocking mistake. The parents of the deceased boy were shocked and fainted at Skardu airport when they came to know that their sons body had been left behind in Islamabad. Mujtaba, a resident of Katshi village of Kharmang district, was diagnosed with a tumour at a hospital in Skardu and doctors referred him to Rawalpindi for treatment a month ago. His father Muhammad Askari and mother took him to Rawalpindi and he had been under treatment at Benazir Bhutto Hospital for weeks. Mujtaba lost his life in the hospital on Thursday. The parents decided to transport the body of their child to their native village of Katshi for burial, through a PIA flight on Friday, as a 24-hour-long journey from Islamabad to Skardu by road with the body was not possible due to hot weather. Shocked parents, relatives protest against airline managements negligence at Skardu airport The deceased boys parents and another relative confirmed their tickets at flight PK-451 from Islamabad to Skardu on Friday morning. They brought the body to Islamabad airport at 6am and completed cargo procedure for the body after fulfilling SOPs and airlines rules and made the payment. Ibrahim Asadi, a relative of the deceased boy, told Dawn that the body was scheduled to be transported with the parents to Skardu from Islamabad at 9am. He said the flight was delayed for four hours and left Islamabad at 1pm. Upon arrival at Skardu airport at 2pm, the parents were informed that mistakenly the body was not loaded on the plane and left behind at Islamabad airport. The news sparked grief and outrage as parents were shocked and started crying while the boys mother and father fainted at the airport. The relatives of the boy waiting to receive the body also gathered at the airports lounge and started protest against the PIA managements negligence. It continued for three hours. Officials of PIA, Civil Aviation Authority and other departments, who were on duty at Skardu airport, tried to calm down the boys parents and relatives and admitted their mistake. They assured the parents of bringing back the body on Saturday (today). The PIA officials said the company, which handles cargos at the airport, is responsible for not loading the body and assured the parents that action would be taken against it for negligence. The boys parents and relatives chanted slogans against the PIA administration. They said the poor family had paid higher price to transport the body through the PIA flight, but the airline committed a serious negligence. They appealed to the government to take action against those responsible for the negligence. Yousaf Kamal, another relative of the deceased boy, said the body had deliberately not been loaded on the plane. He said Minister for Kashmir Affairs and Gilgit-Baltistan Engr Amir Muqam was scheduled to fly to Gilgit from Islamabad on Friday, adding that the PIA flight from Islamabad to Gilgit couldnt operate due to the bad weather condition. He said the federal minister had changed his plan and decided to go to Skardu and kept the passengers waiting. He said the flight was scheduled to depart from Islamabad at 9am, but was delayed till 1pm to accommodate the minister, leaving the body behind at the airport. Published in Dawn, May 11th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Downside risks for Pakistan remain exceptionally high: IMF
Description : Downside risks for the economy remain exceptionally high, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) said on Friday in its staff report ahead of the governments talks with the fund on a longer term progamme. An IMF mission is expected to visit the country this month to discuss a new programme, ahead of the government beginning its annual budget-making process for the next financial year. Downside risks remain exceptionally high. While the new government has indicated its intention to continue the SBAs (standby arrangement) policies, political uncertainty remains significant, said the fund in its staff report following the second and final review under the SBA.
The fund added that political complexities and high cost of living could weigh on policy, adding that policy slippages, together with lower external financing, could undermine the narrow path to debt sustainability and place pressure on the exchange rate. The IMF also said higher commodity prices and disruptions to shipping, or tighter global financial conditions, would also adversely affect external stability for the cash-strapped nation. The fund stressed the need for timely post-programme external financing disbursements.
Last month, the country completed a short-term $3 billion programme, which helped stave off sovereign default, but Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif has stressed the need for a fresh, longer term programme. Pakistan narrowly averted default last summer and the economy has stabilised after the completion of the last IMF programme with inflation coming down to around 17 per cent in April from a record high 38pc last May. The country is still dealing with a high fiscal shortfall and while the external account deficit has been controlled through import control mechanisms, it has come at the expense of stagnating growth, which is expected to be around 2pc this year compared to negative growth last year. Pakistan is expected to seek at least $6bn and request additional financing from the Fund under the Resilience and Sustainability Trust. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Pakistan remain unbeaten in Azlan Shah Cup as match with New Zealand ends in tie
Description : Pakistan on Friday secured a tie in their match against New Zealand in the 30th Azlan Shah Hockey Cup. Pakistans fifth match today, which was played in Malaysias Ipoh city at 1pm (PKT), saw them remain unbeaten throughout the tournament. The match ended in a draw, with both teams securing one point each, the Pakistan Hockey Federation (PHF) said.
View this post on Instagram
Senior player Ammad Shakeel is leading the 18-member squad with Abu Bakr as the vice-captain. Japan lead the points table with 13 points while Pakistan rank second with 11 points. New Zealand hold the third position with seven points while Malaysia follow them with a point less.
View this post on Instagram
According to the PHF, both Pakistan and New Zealand had not scored by half-time. New Zealand then succeeded in scoring a field goal in the 35th minute of the game. However, Abu Bakr amassed a goal for Pakistan in the 43rd minute while playing at the penalty corner. Pakistan and Japan had already qualified for the final match, which will take place at 5:30pm (PKT) on Saturday at the Azlan Shah Stadium in Ipoh, after winning their respective matches on Wednesday. Pakistan had defeated Canada 5-4 while Japan beat hosts Malaysia 2-1. According to Radio Pakistan, Pakistan have won their three matches against Malaysia, South Korea and Canada while the ones against Japan and New Zealand ended in a draw. Meanwhile, after their 3-1 victory against Canada today, Japan have four wins plus a draw. Earlier this month, head coach Roelant Oltmans had said he expected an improved show by Pakistan in the tournament. Oltmans, 69, has served Pakistans senior and junior teams in different roles since 2004 and was involved with the youth side in his most recent stint. Pakistan won the Azlan Shah Cup title thrice  in 1999, 2000 and 2003  and came third in the last edition which was also held in Ipoh in 2022. Malaysia are the defending champions of this years edition. Addressing the squad via video link, Information Minister Attaullah Tarar reiterated the governments commitment to hockey while also mentioning a campaign across all forms of media to highlight the teams achievements in the Azlan Shah Cup, according to a report from state-run Radio Pakistan. He added that the prime minister would focus on removing obstacles in the development of hockey in Pakistan. Tara said final would be broadcast nationwide tomorrow on Saturday and wished the team luck. The entire nation is praying for the victory of Pakistan and is looking forward to welcome a champion team. Rana Mashood Ahmed, chairman of the Prime Ministers Youth Programme, also congratulated the team for reaching the final after thirteen years. He added that Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif would also host the team on its return and address issues impeding hockeys development in the country. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Who can rock the hybrid boat?
Description : A NUMBER of developments over the past week suggest that the establishment is keen to enforce/ maintain the status quo and the only impediment in its path may be an assertive superior judiciary that has been increasingly finding its feet in recent weeks. If jailed PTI leader and former prime minister Imran Khans article in UKs conservative right-wing Telegraph newspaper blaming the military leadership directly for all his woes the week before was not hint enough of the state of play, two public statements by the latter clarified issues rather unambiguously. The first came in the DG ISPRs press briefing, which was ostensibly called to discuss Afghanistan-based terrorist groups involvement in attacks on Chinese nationals working on development projects in the country. But in response to a couple of questions about the PTI and Imran Khan related to the events of May 9 last year, the DG ISPR stated unequivocally that the only path to rehabilitation for the political party and its leaders was to seek forgiveness for attacking your own forces.
Then, perhaps, talks could happen and that too with political parties (ie, the government), as the military had nothing to do with politics. Imran Khan has been consistent in saying he wouldnt talk to the powerless political parties and that a meaningful dialogue is possible only with the military. The DG ISPR also lamented the delay in the prosecution and sentencing of all those responsible for the May mayhem  including the leaders and mastermind against whom irrefutable evidence has been gathered and submitted  and, in doing so, appeared to hint at the establishments frustrations with what it perceives as roadblocks being erected by the judiciary. The content of the live presser evoked an equally adamant response from the PTI, which went on the offensive, reiterating its stance that May 9 was a false flag operation, accusing the militarys spokesman of being economical with the truth, and saying it would be happy to live with the findings of an impartial judicial commission into the May 9 events and would even apologise if found to be at fault. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. The military spokesman had pre-empted this demand in his briefing earlier by saying if a probe were to happen, as was being demanded, it ought to start with 2014, and not nine years later. The 2014 PTI sit-in in the federal capital was said to have been instigated and backed by the then ISI chief. This was the first indication that the military was prepared to hold its own accountable for past follies, if it paved the way for the trials and sentencing of PTI leaders it says were responsible for the attacks on defence installations in a number of cities in Punjab and KP. While the spokesman left nothing to the imagination, on the first anniversary of May 9, the army chief added his voice to his chief spokesmans in terms of stressing the need for punishing the perpetrators of the violence a year earlier, also lashing out against what he called digital terrorism.
This indicates that harsher curbs on social media are planned. So far, the PTI has had overwhelming social media dominance and had been able to keep a step ahead of its adversaries, but we will find out soon whether it has what it takes to bypass software the Chinese have developed over the years (and Pakistan has reportedly acquired) and successfully used to block dissident content. With this ever-widening gulf between the establishment and the party it once saw as a panacea for all that ails Pakistan, the one thing that many felt could force a rethink in the establishment would have been a public manifestation of the immense support enjoyed by the PTI, as evidenced in last Februarys elections. Many Pakistan watchers keenly waited all day for multitudes of PTI supporters to spill out onto the roads and streets of major urban conurbations on the party leaders call to break the shackles and protest on May 9. But the brutal crackdown of the past one year seems to have knocked the wind out of the partys sails and worn down the workers will. People may turn out to vote for it in droves, but did not appear prepared to risk life, limb and liberty in coming out for mass protests. Some small localised protests did happen, but had zero impact in the sense of influencing decision-making in the corridors of power. Going forward, a couple of factors will play a role in steering developments. The first and foremost will be the confidence the army chief has in his control over his institution. His predecessor appointed a dozen major generals to three stars in his final six weeks in office and left the incumbent little room in terms of forming his own team. Natural attrition and the more dramatic exit of a couple of three stars on disciplinary grounds recently has, 18 months down the line, given the chief an opportunity to place senior officers of his own choosing in key roles which will give him greater freedom of action both inside and outside the institution. The promotion of three officers this week, including the DG ISPR, to three stars was another step in that direction. The military saw May 9 as a coup against the chief, a failed attempt to dislodge him from office. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. With the PTI protests failing to gather momentum, the only impediment in his path seems to be an increasingly assertive superior judiciary. It can and will, in all likelihood, challenge the establishments pre-eminence in decision-making. It isnt clear how the latter plans to deal with that, especially because it believes that a direly needed economic revival is only possible under the umbrella of a hybrid set-up and in a relatively calm political environment. Only the judiciary can rock its boat now. The writer is a former editor of Dawn. abbas.nasir@hotmail.com Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Indian elections
Description : THE Islamophobic rhetoric being employed by Narendra Modi for this election campaign has become shrill. Pakistan has nearly always been an electoral issue in India. However, this time, it is Indian Muslims who are bearing the brunt of the Indian prime ministers hate speech. Speaking in Rajasthan last month, he called Muslims infiltrators and said they produce too many children. In Gujarat, where, as chief minister, he had overseen the massacre of Muslims in 2002, he accused the Congress of seeking to loot Indias wealth and redistribute it among Muslims, and of organising a vote jihad against his leadership. Later, he accused the Congress and Muslims of stealing Hindu wealth and property.
Modis inflammatory rhetoric was followed by the BJPs campaign video portraying Muslims as outsiders who plundered Indias wealth. As concerns grew about communal violence, the video was removed. These allegations are a sequel to Modis public referencing of earlier conspiracy theories of love jihad (Muslims forcibly converting Hindu women and marrying them to increase the Muslim population) or land jihad (capturing land to construct religious structures and gaining control of Indias territory). Concerns that his rhetoric might incite further violence against Indian Muslims are increasing. Ordinarily, since Hindus are in a majority in India, it may be difficult to question the rationale of creating a Hindu state. However, two observations are in order. One, the expansionist designs of the cherished Hindu state seek the creation of an Akhand Bharat, a Hindu right fantasy, which would violate the territorial integrity of Nepal, Bangladesh, Pakistan, and Afghanistan, as per a map displayed in the new parliament building. This is not acceptable to the aforementioned independent states. Two, though the creation of a Hindu state should not translate into discrimination against minorities, regrettably this will be the case. The works of French political scientist Christophe Jaffrelot illustrate how Muslims, 14.5 per cent of Indias population, are grossly underrepresented in bureaucracy, the judiciary, police, and legislative organs. They are second-class citizens.
The Muslim-majority area of Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmiri is also being subjected to demographic engineering. The destruction of the centuries-old Babri Masjid by Hindu zealots in 1992 and the construction of a temple in its place has set a precedent that might be followed for other historic mosques. This contrasts sharply with the UAEs gesture of permitting a Hindu temple in Abu Dhabi. Modis anti-Muslim rhetoric is raising concerns of violence. Analysts are also pointing out the fascist tendencies of the BJP regime, a steep decline in democratic values, and a departure from the moorings of pluralism and secularism on which modern India was founded. In her book The Incarcerations, Alpa Shah contends that Modis India is using its national security apparatus to incarcerate ordinary citizens for their dissenting views. Commenting on the book, Arundhati Roy stated that this was about criminalisation and incarceration of dissent itself. Strikingly, the Modi regime has also used art and culture to project the Hindutva philosophy. Kunal Purohits book H-Pop: The Secretive World of Hindutva Pop Stars shows how Hindutva pop stars and influencers are being used to spread the message of Hindu supremacy and create acceptance of Hindutvas core beliefs. Apart from this, Modi is playing on his governments accomplishments: making India the worlds fifth largest economy; the construction of 50,000 kilometres of national highways; boosting Indias military spending; building Vikrant, Indias first domestically built aircraft carrier; and the Chandrayaan-3 moon landing. His prospects of winning a third term have been bolstered by a weak opposition. Despite the formation of the Congress-led 37-party INDIA coalition, there is no real challenge. What has bolstered his outreach is Indias enhanced global standing. In his book Why Bharat Matters, S. Jaishankar presents India as a leader of the global south and makes a case for the rejuvenation of India as a civilisational state.
There are some lessons that Pakistan could learn from Indias electoral process. One, despite the large scale of Indias elections (969 million registered voters; 1m polling stations) and the use of electronic voting machines, election results are largely accepted without much ado. Two, there is no caretaker government, as the incumbents become caretakers in a way, and refrain from announcing major policy decisions or sanctioning expenditure for development schemes. If Modi wins a third term, he is likely to maintain his pro-Hindutva, anti-Muslim, and hegemonic attitude towards regional countries, particularly Pakistan. The write is a former foreign secretary and chairman of Sanober Institute Islamabad. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Overflowing cups
Description : ON my travels in the last two years I noticed a new accessory: large water bottles. You know the ones with the straw protruding from its top? The most coveted one at the moment is the one which retails for around $45  which is roughly Rs12,000, but sells for Rs18,000 in some Karachi markets. This water bottle is a reminder of how our overconsumption is exacerbating the climate crisis. Despite all the evidence, it doesnt feel like a climate crisis when you look at our tendency to buy more  of everything. Plenty has been written about how bulk buying of clothes has accelerated fast fashion culture. These fast-moving trends have a devastating impact on the climate, from labour abuse in the garment industry to microfibres polluting Earth and water. The fashion industry is estimated to be responsible for 10 per cent of global carbon emissions, according to a 2020 report by the European Parliament. Although fashion houses will use terms like sustainable practices, only 1pc of used clothing is recycled into new clothes. The global textile production has doubled from 58 million tonnes in 2010 and is expected to grow to 145m tonnes by 2030, says the European Environment Agency. This is great news for world economies, except that it takes 200 years for some materials to decompose: synthetic fabrics like polyester, for example, break down into small plastic particles which last forever. This should horrify us, but one look at women lining up to buy the new XYZ designer lawn collection across Pakistan proves weve not grasped the severity of the climate crisis. Or care about it. I can sympathise with this, having heard people say how despondent they feel about the state of the  well, state; how change doesnt seem likely, so why care about the environment. My students, however, care very much about the environment, more than politicians do; they are inheriting a planet deluged in waste. But as valiant a generation this Z is proving  defying universitys bullying tactics for example  they are, according to studies, also the most likely to be influenced. Earlier, there was value attached to things and a sensibility too. Against this backdrop, whats the harm in buying a stainless steel cup which comes with a lifetime guarantee? Because it does not stop at one cup. You only have to go to TikTok to see the cupboards lined up with up to 37 different coloured cups of a single brand. People line up outside stores to buy the new release, there are sites dedicated to selling them. This particular company, which catered to blue collar workers in the US, has gone from earning $73m in 2019 to $750m last year, according to Vox. The companys claim, that it can keep cold drinks cold for 11 hours and hot drinks hot for seven hours, received an unlikely boost when, last year, a womans cup survived a car fire. The woman posted a Tik Tok (of course) of her burned-to-a-shell car, but the cup remained in its cup holder, and she rattled it to show the ice was still in it. This was marketing gold for the company, which bought the lady a new car and cup. It is this kind of marketing which adds to a products status and makes it more desirable. And causes a lot of problems for the environment. According to a story in the New York Times, producing one stainless steel water bottle was far more environmentally damaging than producing a plastic bottle. I recognise Im being more judgemental than usual, and while I am loathe to shame people for their choices, Im bothered by what these cups are selling  health as a status symbol. As Vox pointed out, people leave comments saying they are hydrated because of such cups. This idea extends to other wellness products: if you buy these clothes or these classes, you will unlock a better, healthier version of yourself, writes Vox. Health and hydration, like skin care, supplements, yoga pants etc, are part of a self-care trend that only fuels fast capitalism. Our elders were not immune to material acquisition, but there was value attached to things and a sensibility too. Clothes were upcycled, passed onto younger children, handed down as heirlooms even.  Today, it is easy to buy goods from the comfort of your phone, but it is not quenching our desire to want more. This desire is not helping our well-being, because retail therapy, as Time wrote last month, is tanking your mental health. How do we return to a time of stretching the shelf life of things, reusing, recycling, taming the beast in us that wants more irrespective of whether we need it? Simply by buying less, we will see a reduction in emissions and pollution. This is the goal we need to practise and teach our children as their future is at stake.  The writer is an instructor of journalism.  X: LedeingLady Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Exports to Europe fall despite GSP+
Description : ISLAMABAD: Pakistans exports to European countries declined 6.27 per cent in the first nine months of the current fiscal year. Exports to the European Union states have begun to dip in the current fiscal year despite a GSP+ status that allows most Pakistani goods a duty-free entrance into European markets. In October 2023, the European Parliament unanimously voted to extend the GSP+ status for another four years until 2027 for developing countries, including Pakistan, to enjoy duty-free or minimum duty on exports to Europe. In absolute terms, Pakistans exports to the EU dipped to $6.105bn in 9MFY24 from $6.27bn in the corresponding months of last year. According to figures compiled by the State Bank of Pakistan, the decline was mainly due to reduced demand for Pakistani goods in western, southern, and northern Europe. In FY23, exports to the EU dropped 4.41pc to $8.188bn from $8.566bn in the preceding fiscal year. Western Europe, which includes countries such as Germany, the Netherlands, France, Italy and Belgium, accounts for the largest portion of Pakistans exports to the EU. However, exports to this region have significantly decreased by 12pc. The export value stood at $2.947bn in the first nine months of FY24, down from $3.353bn during the same period last year. While exports to western, southern, and northern Europe have declined, there is a silver lining in the form of an uptick in exports to Eastern Europe. The exports saw an increase of 8.38pc to $466.19m in 9MFY24, up from $430.14m in the corresponding months last year. Exports to southern Europe declined 1.24pc to $2.216bn in 9MFY24 from $2.244bn in the corresponding period last year. In this region, exports to Spain grew 3.73pc to $1.084 in 9MFY24 from $1.045bn last year. Exports to Italy declined 3.22pc to $825.44m in 9MFY24, compared to $852.93 m in the same period last year. However, exports to northern Europe witnessed a 2.31pc dip. The export value to this region stood at $475.92m, down from $487.19m in the corresponding period last year. Before Brexit, Pakistans major export destination was the United Kingdom. In the post-Brexit period, Pakistans exports to the UK slightly went up to $1.529bn in 9MFY24 from $1.494bn over the corresponding period of last year, indicating an increase of 2.34pc. In FY23, Pakistans exports dipped by 10.63pc to $1.966bn to the UK from $2.20bn in the same period of the preceding year. The British government, however, has assured Islamabad that there will be no change in the post-Brexit scenario, as evident from Pakistans inclusion in its preferential market access scheme. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Djokovic bottle strike overshadows Rome Open cruise past Moutet
Description :
SERBIAS Novak Djokovic reacts after being hit on the head by a bottle following his Rome Open match against Corentin Moutet of France at the Foro Italico.Reuters
ROME: Novak Djokovics fast start at the Rome Open was overshadowed on Friday after the tennis icon was struck with a hard plastic water bottle while greeting fans following his 6-3, 6-1 win over Frances Corentin Moutet. World number one Djokovic was left crouched on the ground in agony as the bottle hit him on the back of the head as he was signing autographs while he exited the centre court at the Foro Italico. Djokovic was then led from the arena on foot by security staff who covered the 24-time Grand Slam winner while he made his way into the bowels of the stands. A spokesman for the Italian tennis federation (FITP) told AFP that Djokovic had been taken back to his hotel with a lightly bleeding head and that there is no risk that he will withdraw from the tournament. The spokesman said that Djokovic did not need stitches and that the bottle likely fell while a fan tried to get the players attention, adding that security camera footage is being consulted to help identify the culprit. His condition is not a cause for concern, said organisers in a short statement before then sending media a video in which it appears that the bottle accidentally slipped from a spectators grasp before landing on Djokovics head. Djokovic will face Chiles Alejandro Tabilo in the third round with a great chance to add to his array of titles at the Foro Italico, where only Rafael Nadal has won more with 10. Thank you for the messages of concern, Djokovic wrote on the social media platform X. This was an accident and I am fine resting at the hotel with an ice pack. See you all on Sunday. The Serbian has made no secret in the past that he loves playing in Italy and with a clutch of big names either out injured or struggling he will fancy his chances of a record-extending 41st Masters 1000 crown. One of Djokovics potential threats, third seed Alexander Zverev, breezed into the third round with a 6-0, 6-4 win over Australias Aleksandar Vukic. Both Casper Ruud and Zverev were put on Djokovics side of the draw and German Zverev could face the tournament favourite in the last four after Ruud of Norway was upset in surprising fashion. After sweeping the first set against Serbias Miomir Kecmanovic, Ruud fell 0-6, 6-4, 6-4 on his preferred surface, clay. Ruud once won four clay-court tournaments in a row and was a semi-finalist in Rome in 2020, 2022 and 2023. Ruud was not the only seeded player eliminated on Friday. Portugals Nuno Borges defeated 15th seed Alexander Bublik of Kazakhstan 6-4, 6-4, as Bubliks seven aces were hindered by six double faults. Chinas Zhizhen Zhang knocked out French 19th seed Adrian Mannarino 6-1, 6-3. Italian qualifier Francesco Passaro, ranked just 240th in the world, toppled 23rd seed Tallon Griekspoor of the Netherlands 4-6, 6-3, 7-6 (7/5). Another Italy native, Luciano Darderi, beat 28th-seeded Mariano Navone of Argentina 6-3, 6-2, and Brazilian qualifier Thiago Monteiro upset Australian 32nd seed Jordan Thompson 6-1, 6-3. French qualifier Terence Atmane moved on when 26th seed Lorenzo Musetti of Italy retired down 7-5, 1-0. Eighth seed Grigor Dimitrov of Bulgaria beat Japans Yoshihito Nishioka 7-5, 6-4 while Karen Khachanov of Russia and Francisco Cerundolo of Argentina both won in straight sets. Three American stalwarts are on to the next round. Taylor Fritz, the 11th seed, swept Italian wild card Fabio Fognini 6-3, 6-4; 12th-seeded Ben Shelton rallied for a 4-6, 6-3, 6-4 win over Russias Pavel Kotov; and Sebastian Korda outlasted Italys Flavio Cobolli 7-6 (8/6), 4-6, 6-4. Ons Jabeurs tough 2024 continued after being dumped out of the womens tournament in the second round by Sofia Kenin 7-5, 2-6, 6-4. World number nine Jabeur, who in 2022 became the first Arab player to win a WTA 1000 title, was beaten by unseeded American Kenin in a gruelling match which lasted two hours and 17 minutes in the hot Rome sunshine. Belarusian star Aryna Sabalenka, the tournaments second seed, had a scare of her own but came out on the other side. She defeated American Katie Volynets 4-6, 6-3, 6-2, saving 11 of 16 break points along the way. Fifth seed Maria Sakkari of Greece skated past Frances Varvara Gracheva 6-2, 6-2, and Latvian ninth seed Jelena Ostapenko defeated Russian Anastasia Potapova 6-4, 6-2. Jasmine Paolini, seeded 11th, wasnt as fortunate. Mayar Sherif of Egypt outlasted the Italian crowd-favorite Paolini 7-6 (7/4), 2-6, 6-4 in two hours, 41 minutes. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Second night of auroras seen amid extreme solar storm
Description : Auroras lit up skies across swaths of the planet for the second night in a row on Saturday, after already dazzling Earthlings from the United States to Tasmania to the Bahamas the day before. A powerful solar storm  which could continue into Sunday  has triggered spectacular celestial shows usually confined to the far northern reaches of the planet, hence their nickname of the northern lights. I have the sensation of living through a historic night in France [] It was really charged, with solar particles and emotions, Eric Lagadec, an astrophysicist at the Observatoire de Cote dAzur, wrote on social media after the first night. Find good spots, away from the lights, with a clear view to the north! Late on Saturday evening, pictures again started trickling onto social media as people in the United States reported sightings, though not as strong as Friday nights. The first of several coronal mass ejections (CMEs)  expulsions of plasma and magnetic fields from the Sun   came just after 4pm GMT on Friday, according to the US-based National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)s Space Weather Prediction Center (SWPC). It was later upgraded to an extreme geomagnetic storm   the first since the Halloween Storms of October 2003 that caused blackouts in Sweden and damaged power infrastructure in South Africa. Fridays storm was listed as hitting level five geomagnetic conditions  the highest on the scale. Saturday saw G3 to G5 conditions, with G4 or higher conditions predicted Sunday and G3 conditions possible into Monday. But no major disruptions to power or communications networks appear to have been reported this time around, despite initial worries from authorities. There have only been preliminary reports of power grid irregularities, degradation to high-frequency communications, GPS and possibly satellite navigation, the SWPC said. Elon Musk, whose Starlink satellite internet operator has some 5,000 satellites in low Earth orbit, said his satellites were under a lot of pressure, but holding up so far. However Chinas National Centre for Space Weather issued a red alert on Saturday morning, warning the storm will impact communications and navigation in most areas of the country, state news agency Xinhua reported. Auroras were visible in the northern half of the country, according to media reports. Excitement over the phenomenon   and otherworldly photos of pink, green and purple night skies   popped up across the world, from Mont Saint-Michel on the French coast to Payette, Idaho  in the western United States  to Australias island state of Tasmania.
People pose for photos as a geomagnetic storm lights up the night sky above the Bonneville Salt Flats on May 10 in Wendover, Utah.  AFP
Unlike solar flares, which travel at the speed of light and reach Earth in around eight minutes, CMEs travel at a more sedate pace, with officials putting the current average at 800 kilometres per second. The CMEs emanated from a massive sunspot cluster that is 17 times wider than our planet. People with eclipse glasses can also look for the sunspot cluster during the day. The Sun is approaching the peak of an 11-year cycle that brings heightened activity. NOAAs Brent Gordon encouraged the public to try to capture the night sky with phone cameras even if they couldnt see auroras with their naked eyes. Youd be amazed at what you see in that picture versus what you see with your eyes. Fluctuating magnetic fields associated with geomagnetic storms induce currents in long wires, including power lines, which can potentially lead to blackouts. Long pipelines can also become electrified, leading to engineering problems. Spacecraft are also at risk from high doses of radiation, although the atmosphere prevents this from reaching Earth. NASA has a dedicated team looking into astronaut safety and can ask astronauts on the International Space Station to move to places within the outpost that are better shielded. Even pigeons and other species that have internal biological compasses could be affected. Pigeon handlers have noted a reduction in birds coming home during geomagnetic storms, according to NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The most powerful geomagnetic storm in recorded history, known as the Carrington Event after British astronomer Richard Carrington, occurred in September 1859. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : ESSAY: WERE READY FOR YOUR CLOSE-UP NOW
Description : JUNE 13, 2014 I am excited to be here, thrilled to have the opportunity to audition. Despite being on the verge of throwing up, I walk into the audition room assertively. The male and female casting directors size me up. They study the way I carry myself. They ascertain my charisma, assess my brand potential and evaluate my attractiveness. I am conscious of all of it and yet, I allow them to continue doing it.  I am a willing participant in this game, voluntarily choosing to subject myself to constant rejections. Perhaps all artists have masochistic tendencies and perhaps these are mine. The casting directors thank me for coming in and I thank them for their time. I notice that I am trembling as I grab my bag from the floor. Before I have even stepped out of the room, the whisperings have begun.    As I stumble out into the waiting room, the other actresses peer closely at me, attempting to decipher whether I blew it or bagged the role. I remain stoic and they hastily return to rehearsing their monologues. We are all clones of one another. We hold out hope, waiting for that singular break, which will catapult our lives into a growing trajectory. Diary entries from a former actor reflect on how the desire to conform to the norms of the entertainment industry allowed her to lose her own sense of self and how words helped her rediscover it  The room reeks of desperation and throbs with want. I walk out.    Upon returning home, I tactfully avoid my mother, who will undoubtedly want to know how the audition went. I loiter aimlessly in the kitchen, before finally grabbing a glass of water and heading to my bedroom.  I feel restless and out of control. I need to reaffirm my beauty. I pick up my phone and select a desirable photo of myself from my camera roll. In it, Im half-smiling, caught in the golden hour.  I post it to my Instagram and, within a couple of hours, 192 people like it. The comments roll in slowly: stunning!!, OMG, so beautiful. Im moderately satisfied.  I move over to my Instagram mailbox and scroll through a handful of DMs from random men. This, in a way, also reaffirms my beauty. Im living in the male gaze and I no longer mind it. Ive done good. JULY 15, 2015 Across my teenage years, I work sporadically as an actress in Karachi. I scour Facebook pages of production houses and advertising agencies and bookmark audition callouts. I, then, eagerly drive to audition at rented bungalows in Defence and Sea View.  I carefully curate bits of work in commercials, short films and plays  the only mediums where I am provided a larger margin to experiment as a female performer in Pakistan. I am cast as the feminist, middle-aged woman whose husband is cheating on her in a contemporary play or as the galvanising, empowered 20-something Pakistani woman in a commercial. I stare into cameras, grim and unsmiling. I find comfortable homes on stage and sets. I revel in the camaraderie of grown-up adults playing make-believe. I dont mind the long hours or the protracted time it takes for the shots to be lit up  this is all worth the wait. The stage, for me, has become a safe space to be vulnerable, without judgement. In a way, it is a refuge from the hardening of the soul that comes with growing up as a woman in this world. Though I am pleased with my work, a part of me remains discontent. There is a scarcity of roles in Pakistan. Playing the traumatised daughter-in-law or the scorned woman are unappealing options. In auditions, I am still patronised by casting directors, who tell me to be less angry. Yet, I play along. I be what they need. I wear make-up, albeit horrendously. I try to appear striking.  And then, I am mortified when I am not given a callback. My parents are nonplussed. They cannot fathom why their academically gifted daughter prefers a profession where she is commodified and where her youth is a currency. They cannot understand why I have promised loyalty to a media machine that still operates on patriarchal benchmarks of beauty. Unsurprisingly, by my early adulthood, I fail to carve out my own identity. I forfeit my voice. I become an extension of something else and nothing more. FEBRUARY 25, 2017 There are specific moments on set when I am hyper-aware of my gender. I spend hours suspended from reality, with a cast and crew who are strangers I am introduced to just a few hours earlier.  We all attempt to foster greater intimacy for a worthier creative breakthrough  this is within the acting job description, after all. But there are times when this faux closeness is exploited by those with far greater clout than me and, in those moments, the onus of protecting myself falls on me alone. So, I grudgingly laugh along to misogynistic jokes. I do my best not to appear over-friendly. I refuse to prolong conversations beyond work on WhatsApp with casting agents. And after shows, I head straight home, avoiding the spaces where things get murky. Because, who will believe me?  Historically in Pakistan, women simply become a centre of speculation upon whom moral investigations are conducted. Society and viewers will ultimately turn the blame on me  I chose to be a pawn in this industry. I, a Pakistani-Muslim woman, have entered this vulgarity out of my own volition. I do what other women do. I silence myself. I relive traumas. There is no Human Resource team, there are no harassment policies read out on the first day of production, and there is no power I hold. Everything simply goes.  AUGUST 12, 2018 Its August and Im cast in a commercial, which releases on Pakistans Independence Day. Ironically, the theme of this commercial is women empowerment. Ironic because, as I sit in my makeup chair, artists arrive to accentuate my features, cover up my blemishes and contour my nose. Intermittently, they drop in beauty tips on how to tame my hair and encourage me to acquire better make-up. I nod politely, as if Ill actually consider their advice, but all I feel internally is dejected. For years, I had assumed that my mind, my imagination and my education were worthy devices. But in actuality, I had greatly underestimated how much of the world ran on beauty. I slump forward in my chair and think about how I have given so much of myself to a profession where I am a throwaway, simply replaceable by the next pretty young thing who walks through those doors. SEPTEMBER 20, 2018 Ive decided to take a break from acting. Its been five years of endless auditions and unremitting rejections. Of course, discounting the notion that my self-esteem has plummeted to irredeemable depths, the decision also makes sense  Im leaving Pakistan for the first time, to complete my undergraduate degree abroad. In England, I periodically dabble in theatre to satisfy my acting itch. I perform in consequential plays like The Vagina Monologues. I deliver dramatic readings of passages from exiled authors in dimly lit studios. But even here, as a brown-Muslim woman, the roles I am given are scant. The leads are reserved for white people, whilst other ethnicities are relegated to the supporting roles. Here, I face other hitches  I am seen as either too dark or not dark enough. I am either a religious creature or an outlandish woman from an exotic land. I am still seen from a white persons perspective. MARCH 27, 2020 The world has stopped turning on its wheels. A global pandemic rages across the globe and humanity has been ordered to stay home. I scramble to return to Pakistan and spend the next few weeks doing what everyone else is doing  baking, scrolling through social media and bingeing on television shows.  But, after a while, the days mesh into one and I am forced to sit with myself for the first time in my life. I reflect and ponder over the last couple of years, which led to me becoming the woman I am today. One restless night, I pick up my laptop in search of an avenue for creative expression. I open up a blank MS Word document and begin to write. And after 22 years of silencing my voice, the words gush out of me, like a broken faucet which wont turn off. These words had seemingly lived within me, waiting with bated breath, soundlessly patient. So, I write. I write about the experiences I never had. I write stories in which I garbage social norms and where women are flawed individuals. I write stories about the spaces I wish to inhabit. I write about the women who inhabit my real life  women who fire after their yearnings without the fear of retribution. Slowly, I begin sending out my tales into the world, hoping my lived experiences may relate to someone. I face the familiar call of rejection but, ultimately, the year of the pandemic becomes the year of writing.  Through those long months of staying at home, I use my words to reckon with the trauma of my past and the horrifying moments I allowed myself to go through. With reclaiming my narrative, I feel cathartic. By writing about the pain, I have not let it best me. I am finally the protagonist of my own story. As I write, I relearn everything I have been taught. I purge all the venomous psychology, instilled in me as a young girl. I begin to closely understand my womanhood. In my essays and stories, my beauty and physicality are no longer determining factors in my worthiness. My mind is my weapon and, unlike my beauty, it doesnt have an expiration date. OCTOBER 30, 2021 My heart feels irritated. Today, I have nothing to write on my computer. My fingers flick over to the old, bookmarked link of my acting portfolio. As the website loads, my heart starts pounding.  The pictures appear one at a time. I scroll down and see old headshots and performance screen grabs. I am 17, 19, and 20. I am smiling, poised, concealing the hurt. I am being what they need me to be  their thoughts, opinions and desires. I inhale shortly and close my laptop. I am remorseful that I couldnt protect that little girl. That girl who fell in love with the stage. The girl who learnt how to finesse technique, to hit the mark consistently, to access unknowing depths within her. But writing about that girl and restructuring her narrative, I have a greater agency over my past and present. I have allowed myself to gain autonomy through creative expression. These words have saved my life. Neha Maqsood is a writer and poet.
Her work can be read at nehamaqsood.com Published in Dawn, EOS, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Wheats tricky procurement
Description : The ongoing protests by farmers against the governments wheat procurement policy have triggered a debate. Some question why the government persists with a controlled wheat marketing system despite its widespread recognition as a failure, particularly in supporting smallholders, who make up over 90 per cent of the total farmers. It is pertinent to mention that this large-scale procurement, often relying on unsustainable commercial borrowing at high interest, is usually justified in the name of smallholders or national food security, especially when the announced wheat support price exceeds the international price, as in 2024.
Every year, the governments intervention in wheat procurement begins with announcing the wheat support price. This matter frequently sparks intense controversy, as farmers and the government are often at odds. Farmers always insist on cost-plus support price, as they have no sensible justification or incentive to grow wheat otherwise. Additionally, they compare the financial returns of various crops and make rational choices based on potential profitability. Their cost structure depends on the prices of agricultural inputs such as fertiliser, diesel, electricity, seed, pesticides, and labour. Govts inability to set a sustainable wheat support price policy due to the cumbersome and corrupt procurement system harms farmers profits and national agricultural productivity The cost of agricultural inputs rises every year, and since farmers sometimes have to buy these inputs over the notified prices  fertiliser is a classic example  they expect support prices to increase proportionally, regardless of international market trends. However, since we live in a global village with frequent trade between countries, any policy discussion would remain incomplete without factoring in the dynamics of global markets. Data from the past 10 years on wheat support prices, corresponding international prices, and the dollar exchange rate on April 1  the start of the harvest season  reveal that in 2014, 2020, 2021, 2022, and 2023, farmers received lower than the international prices. For instance, on April 1, 2022, the international wheat price was $495 per metric ton, and the dollar exchange rate stood at Rs183.4, which equated to Rs4,287 per 40kg. Yet, the government support price was just Rs2,200. Assuming that farmers kept 50pc of the total national production  26 million metric tonnes  for their own consumption and as seed for the next crop, with the remaining sold, this amounted to Rs678 billion taken out of farmers pockets in a single year due to price disparity. However, there is another side to the story. In 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018, and 2019, Pakistans farmers received higher wheat prices than international ones (as of April 1). This was largely due to the PML-N governments much-criticised policy of artificially capping the dollar exchange rate at about Rs100, which made food imports cheaper  a strategy that could not be sustained over the long term. For example, on April 1, 2016, the international wheat price was $187 per metric ton. With an exchange rate of Rs104.72, this translated to Rs783 per 40 kg, while the government paid Rs1,300 to farmers. Regrettably, during these years, smallholders  those with less than 12 acres of land whose interests are often cited in policy discussions  did not benefit from the support prices due to the cumbersome, sluggish, and corruption-ridden government procurement system. As a result, they had to sell their wheat in the open market at significantly lower prices.
Conversely, in years when international prices were high, government authorities restricted the inter-district movement of wheat. They forcibly lifted wheat stocks from farmers houses, disregarding even the sanctity of chadar and char-diwari. In both scenarios, smallholders ended up disadvantaged, while medium-large farmers with political clout, middlemen, and millers were the ultimate beneficiaries of the procurement system. With a carry-forward of four million metric tons of wheat, mainly due to the import of over 3.2m metric tons just before the new crops harvest, coupled with the low procurement targets set by the Federal and Punjab governments, wheat is currently being sold in the grain markets far below the support price almost equal to international prices. The announced support price has become nothing more than a joke. In this context, if the government finds itself unable to procure significant quantities of wheat at the support price due to persistent financial constraints, a potential policy option could be for the government to stop announcing a support price from next year onward and let the wheat market operate based on market dynamics, similar to the rice and maise markets in Pakistan. However, the government could still procure wheat from the private sector to the extent necessary to ensure food security and price stability. To stabilise the domestic wheat market, the government can consider importing wheat or releasing its strategic reserves, with or without subsidies, depending on the situation. The question is: what will farmers do if the government does not announce a support price and international prices also remain low? Since the production cost and, in turn, profitability per 40kg vary from farm to farm depending on crop yield, farmers with lower crop productivity would try to increase their yields, given the significant yield gap between progressive and conventional farmers. Alternatively, they could switch to other alternative crops like canola, mustard, sunflower, chickpeas, and maise. Already, excessive wheat cultivation has limited the acreage available for chickpeas and edible oilseeds, leading to large-scale imports of these crops every year. In conclusion, it makes economic sense to specialise in crops that enable a more efficient allocation of resources at the national level. However, for the proposed policy to succeed, it is imperative that our grain markets and agricultural inputs markets  especially fertilisers  function efficiently and fairly, free from the manipulation of mafias. Khalid Wattoo is a farmer and development professional, and Dr. Waqar Ahmad is a former Associate Professor at the University of Agriculture, Faisalabad. Published in Dawn, The Business and Finance Weekly, May 6th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : No such thing as strategic state-owned enterprises, says Finance Minister Aurangzeb
Description : Finance Minister Muhammad Aurangzeb on Sunday said that there was no such thing as strategic state-owned enterprises (SOEs) as he stressed the need for privatisation. He made the remarks at a pre-budget conference in Lahore, two days after  Deputy Prime Minister Ishaq Dar said the government would limit its business only to strategic and essential SOEs under its domain but their number would be reduced from 40 after scrutiny. Chairing the Cabinet Committee on Privatisation (CCoP) meeting, which was attended by the finance minister, Dar said privatisation of loss-making SOEs would be a priority. The meeting noted that 40 SOEs were currently categorised as strategic or essential, but respective ministries would submit their details to the Cabinet Committee on State-Owned Enterprises (CCoSOE). The CCoSOE will determine the status of the SOEs to be categorised as strategic or essential entities. Speaking on Sunday, Aurangzeb said: There is no such as [a] strategic SOE. Talking about the meeting chaired by Dar on Friday, he continued, We are absolutely on the same wavelength  that there is no such thing as a strategic SOE. The finance minister said that a meeting would be held tomorrow where we will go back to various ministries and say that all this should be handed over to the private sector. There will be public-private partnership and we will accelerate the privatisation agenda, he said. Commenting on concerns regarding the privatisation of Pakistan International Airlines (PIA), Aurangzeb said the government was not just looking at foreign investors. They are local and foreign investors who are bidding [] there is no such thing that we are only looking at foreign investors, he said. Commenting on a fresh loan programme with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) programme, he said that a larger and longer programme was needed to bring permanence in macroeconomic stability and structural reforms. He also talked about energy reforms, saying that there were leakages and stressed the need for stopping theft. He said that changes were being brought to the boards of distribution companies (Discos) in order to bring in those from the private sector for better corporate governance. And then you will see how we bring those Discos towards concessions or privatisation or a combination of both, he emphasised. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : IMF mission to meet Pakistani authorities next week to discuss next phase of engagement: official
Description : An International Monetary Fund (IMF) mission will meet Pakistani authorities next week to discuss the next phase of engagement, an official from the international money lender said on Sunday. Speaking to Dawn.com, Esther Perez Ruiz, the Funds resident representative for Pakistan, said: A mission team led by Nathan Porter, IMFs mission chief to Pakistan, will meet with authorities next week to discuss the next phase of engagement. The aim is to lay the foundation for better governance and stronger, more inclusive, and resilient economic growth that will benefit all Pakistanis, she added. Pakistan last month completed a short-term $3 billion programme, which helped stave off sovereign default, but the government has stressed the need for a fresh, longer-term programme. Last week, the Fund said that a mission was expected to visit Pakistan this month to discuss the FY25 budget, policies, and reforms under a potential new programme for the welfare of all Pakistanis. Pakistan narrowly averted default last summer, and the $350bn economy has stabilised after the completion of the last IMF programme, with inflation coming down to around 17 per cent in April from a record high 38pc last May. The country is still dealing with a high fiscal shortfall and while the external account deficit has been controlled through import control mechanisms, it has come at the expense of stagnating growth, which is expected to be around 2pc this year compared to negative growth last year. Pakistan is expected to seek at least $6bn and request additional financing from the Fund under the Resilience and Sustainability Trust. On Friday, the Fund said that downside risks for the economy remain exceptionally high. Downside risks remain exceptionally high. While the new government has indicated its intention to continue the SBAs (standby arrangement) policies, political uncertainty remains significant, said the IMF in its staff report following the second and final review under the standby agreement. The Fund added that political complexities and high cost of living could weigh on policy, adding that policy slippages, together with lower external financing, could undermine the narrow path to debt sustainability and place pressure on the exchange rate. The IMF also said higher commodity prices and disruptions to shipping, or tighter global financial conditions, would also adversely affect external stability for the cash-strapped nation. The fund stressed the need for timely post-programme external financing disbursements. Additional input from Reuters Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Situation in AJK calms down after 2 days of violent clashes
Description : Following violent clashes over the last 48 hours, which left a policeman dead, the situation in Muzaffarabad seemed to have calmed down on Sunday, with a Rangers detachment that was sent to Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK) from Kohala having been withdrawn. AJK witnessed violent clashes between the police and activists of a rights movement amid a wheel-jam and shutter-down strike across the territory on Friday and Saturday, which left at least one police official dead and more than 90 others injured, officials told Dawn.com on Saturday. Mirpur Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP) Kamran Ali had said that Sub-inspector Adnan Qureshi succumbed to a gunshot wound in the chest in the town of Islamgarh, where he was deployed to stop a rally for Muzaffarabad under the banner of the Jammu Kashmir Joint Awami Action Committee (JAAC). The JAAC, which has traders at the forefront in most parts of the state, has been seeking the provision of electricity as per hydropower generation cost in AJK, subsidised wheat flour and an end to the privileges of the elite class. They called for the strike following the arrest of at least 70 of their members in raids on Thursday. Reports emerged in the wake of the protests on Sunday that three Rangers battalions had entered the territory through Kohala and were awaiting further orders. However, AJK Minister for Rural Development Faisal Mumtaz Rathore confirmed that the Rangers, due to the intervention of President Asif Zardari, were called back as soon as they entered Azad Kashmir since the situation had calmed down. Meanwhile, in Islamabad, former prime minister of AJK Sardar Abdul Qayyum Niazi slammed the deployment, calling it a drama and an attempt to score political points. First they send them, then call them back, what is this? the ex-AJK PM said. Those fighting for their rights and engaging in protest are free to do so, but they must remain peaceful, Niazi said in a press conference. He added that they (the protestors) must not give the enemy a chance to sow discord within the territory and create infighting. In a post on Facebook, Rathore acknowledged the public demands for cheap electricity, but admitted that addressing them was out of his hands. The big demand of the people, the demand for cheap electricity and the end of loadshedding, falls under the jurisdiction of the Government of Pakistan, Rathore said. Urging the public to remain peaceful, he said, In this one year [I have been in office], I have never been against the right to peaceful protest and [never] supported violence against people. In the aftermath of the protests, JAAC leader Shaukat Nawaz Mir reiterated that the committee is a peaceful organisation and willing to negotiate with the authorities to ensure the provision of cheap electricity and cheap flour. He also appreciated the withdrawal of the Rangers from the area. We have planned another shutter-down strike, he told reporters on Sunday. We have been peaceful for the last year and always will be a peaceful movement. This territory and its institutions and police are our own. Mir maintained that the JAAC is advocating for the rights of the public in AJK, but it is the bureaucrats who do not understand the publics needs that are doing the damage. The JAAC is peaceful and open to negotiations, Mir added, requesting to be notified by the authorities about decisions taken. We do not want to hurt anyone. He also slammed the federal government for not cutting down spending while at the same time claiming they have no room in the budget to subsidise electricity or flour. The government claims they cant provide cheap electricity and flour because they have no budget, but they have the money for watches and cars, Mir said, adding that the federal government and the prime minister should be ashamed. I dont want my forum to be controversial, Mir said. We are made up of respectable politicians  the local council is standing with us. The JAAC leader added that the movement was successful since members of multiple parties and councils are on our side. Our nation is conscious now. There is no politics here, we just want our rights and identity. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Fight till the last ball, PCB chief tells cricket team in Dublin
Description : Pakistan Cricket Board (PCB) Chairman Mohsin Naqvi on Sunday told the national team to fight till the last ball ahead of the second match of a three-match T20 series against Ireland. As he met players of the mens national team in the Irish capital of Dublin, the PCB quoted him as saying: Fight till the last ball; the competition should be apparent.
On Friday, Ireland recorded their maiden T20 win against Pakistan who could not defend a solid-looking 182-5 after being put in to bat first, dealing a shocking blow to the Babar Azam-led sides preparations for the World Cup, which is taking place next month in the United States. The loss to Ireland, who are in Pakistans group in the T20 World Cup, came after a series draw on home soil to a New Zealand squad missing most of their first-choice players. With Babar only recently reinstated as captain, it was another bump in the road for their tournament preparation.
Todays match will start at 7pm, with Ireland leading the series by 1-0. In a post on X, the PCB shared a video of Naqvi meeting the Green Shirts and speaking to them, adding that a detailed discussion on the action plan took place during the two-hour-long meetup. Encouraging the team, the PCB chairman urged the players to play with hard work, passion and a professional approach. He noted that T20 cricket needed a unique and aggressive approach, adding that victory was only possible if cricket was played in a modern manner. An action plan can be formulated while sitting in a room but the real test is on the ground, where the performance should be visible, the PCB quoted him as telling the team. Naqvi praised all players as undoubtedly talented, professional and the best, adding that the teams bowling attack was splendid. However, he emphasised that great attention was required when fielding so that the opponent cannot get any chance to score. The players are the hope for Pakistan and you have to meet the nations expectations. Teamwork is the fundamental thing for victory, the PCB chairman said. He noted that the public loved cricket and had expectations from the team. Naqvi said that success would come if all 11 of the players in the team performed with unity. No one is accepting the loss in the first match against Ireland. The real test after Ireland and England is the World Cup, he added. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Canada arrests fourth Indian national in killing of Sikh activist
Description : A fourth Indian national was charged by Canadian authorities on Saturday in the 2023 killing of a separatist Sikh leader in Vancouver. Amandeep Singh, 22, was already being held for unrelated gun charges before being charged with first-degree murder and conspiracy to commit murder in the slaying of Hardeep Singh Nijjar. Three other Indian nationals were arrested this month. The killing sparked a diplomatic row between Ottawa and New Delhi when Prime Minister Justin Trudeau linked Indian intelligence to the killing. Nijjar  who immigrated to Canada in 1997 and became a citizen in 2015  had advocated for a separate Sikh state, known as Khalistan, carved out of India. He had been wanted by Indian authorities for alleged terrorism and conspiracy to commit murder  allegations he denied. He was shot dead on June 18, 2023, by masked assailants in the parking lot of the Sikh temple he led in suburban Vancouver. Trudeau announced several months later that Canada had credible allegations connecting Indian intelligence to the slaying. India dismissed the allegations as absurd and responded furiously, briefly curbing visas for Canadians and forcing Ottawa to withdraw diplomats. In November, the US Justice Department charged an Indian citizen living in the Czech Republic with allegedly plotting a similar assassination attempt on American soil. Prosecutors said in unsealed court documents that an Indian government official was also involved in the planning. The shock allegations came after US President Joe Biden hosted Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi for a rare state visit, as Washington seeks closer ties with India against Chinas growing influence. US intelligence agencies have assessed that the plot on American soil was approved by Indias top spy official at the time, Samant Goel, the Washington Post reported in April. Canada is home to some 770,000 Sikhs, who make up about two per cent of the countrys population, with a vocal minority calling for an independent state of Khalistan. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Second night of auroras seen amid extreme solar storm
Description : Auroras lit up skies across swaths of the planet for the second night in a row on Saturday, after already dazzling Earthlings from the United States to Tasmania to the Bahamas the day before. A powerful solar storm  which could continue into Sunday  has triggered spectacular celestial shows usually confined to the far northern reaches of the planet, hence their nickname of the northern lights. I have the sensation of living through a historic night in France [] It was really charged, with solar particles and emotions, Eric Lagadec, an astrophysicist at the Observatoire de Cote dAzur, wrote on social media after the first night. Find good spots, away from the lights, with a clear view to the north! Late on Saturday evening, pictures again started trickling onto social media as people in the United States reported sightings, though not as strong as Friday nights. The first of several coronal mass ejections (CMEs)  expulsions of plasma and magnetic fields from the Sun   came just after 4pm GMT on Friday, according to the US-based National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)s Space Weather Prediction Center (SWPC). It was later upgraded to an extreme geomagnetic storm   the first since the Halloween Storms of October 2003 that caused blackouts in Sweden and damaged power infrastructure in South Africa. Fridays storm was listed as hitting level five geomagnetic conditions  the highest on the scale. Saturday saw G3 to G5 conditions, with G4 or higher conditions predicted Sunday and G3 conditions possible into Monday. But no major disruptions to power or communications networks appear to have been reported this time around, despite initial worries from authorities. There have only been preliminary reports of power grid irregularities, degradation to high-frequency communications, GPS and possibly satellite navigation, the SWPC said. Elon Musk, whose Starlink satellite internet operator has some 5,000 satellites in low Earth orbit, said his satellites were under a lot of pressure, but holding up so far. However Chinas National Centre for Space Weather issued a red alert on Saturday morning, warning the storm will impact communications and navigation in most areas of the country, state news agency Xinhua reported. Auroras were visible in the northern half of the country, according to media reports. Excitement over the phenomenon   and otherworldly photos of pink, green and purple night skies   popped up across the world, from Mont Saint-Michel on the French coast to Payette, Idaho  in the western United States  to Australias island state of Tasmania.
People pose for photos as a geomagnetic storm lights up the night sky above the Bonneville Salt Flats on May 10 in Wendover, Utah.  AFP
Unlike solar flares, which travel at the speed of light and reach Earth in around eight minutes, CMEs travel at a more sedate pace, with officials putting the current average at 800 kilometres per second. The CMEs emanated from a massive sunspot cluster that is 17 times wider than our planet. People with eclipse glasses can also look for the sunspot cluster during the day. The Sun is approaching the peak of an 11-year cycle that brings heightened activity. NOAAs Brent Gordon encouraged the public to try to capture the night sky with phone cameras even if they couldnt see auroras with their naked eyes. Youd be amazed at what you see in that picture versus what you see with your eyes. Fluctuating magnetic fields associated with geomagnetic storms induce currents in long wires, including power lines, which can potentially lead to blackouts. Long pipelines can also become electrified, leading to engineering problems. Spacecraft are also at risk from high doses of radiation, although the atmosphere prevents this from reaching Earth. NASA has a dedicated team looking into astronaut safety and can ask astronauts on the International Space Station to move to places within the outpost that are better shielded. Even pigeons and other species that have internal biological compasses could be affected. Pigeon handlers have noted a reduction in birds coming home during geomagnetic storms, according to NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The most powerful geomagnetic storm in recorded history, known as the Carrington Event after British astronomer Richard Carrington, occurred in September 1859. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : ADB links support with IMFs clean chit
Description :   Given my interactions with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the dialogue decisiveness of the current government, I feel very hopeful that there will be a successor programme from the Fund, said the Asian Development Banks (ADB) Country Director for Pakistan Yong Ye in an exclusive interview on the sidelines of ADBs 57th Annual Meeting in Tbilisi this week. Tacitly indicating that support from ADB would only be possible with a clean chit from the Fund, Mr Ye expressed cautious optimism for the economy. Highlighting the uncertainties from last year, Mr Ye termed the IMF agreement announced in June as a miracle. Since then, however, he said, the caretaker government did a good job stabilising the economy under the Funds Stand-By Arrangement. More importantly, he added, with the IMF agreement in place, the central banks foreign exchange reserves increased from $4.4 billion to over $9bn in the week ending on May 3. While the country may still be in the ICU, its immediate liquidity crisis has been sorted, and default has been avoided. This has given some confidence to the markets, he said. Record highs of PSX Commenting on the frequent new highs of the Pakistan Stock Exchange (PSX), Mr Ye observed that previously, when the eurobond payment was due, there had been a lot of hype in the media with speculations about whether the country would be able to repay or default. Such pieces did not induce courage and the markets started fluctuating, contributing to a fluctuating exchange rate. Banks top official says Pakistan has sorted out immediate liquidity crisis, but still in ICU This time around, in April, when the $1bn eurobond payment was due, it was paid without fanfare, indicating much better market confidence. Other positive indicators, such as a narrowing external account deficit and recovering remittances, have also improved investor confidence. However, fiscal deficit challenges remain. One major reason behind them is the high interest rate and high debt servicing burden. Act on what you know In my first meeting with Finance Minister Muhammad Aurangzeb, he showed his commitment to implementing and acting on reforms, said Mr Ye. Pakistan does not need more economic prescriptions, he said, agreeing with the finance ministers recent statements. He said the general perception is that Pakistan knows what it needs to do but never does it. Act on what you know needs to be done. He emphasised that the ADB management wants to be with the government in this difficult time. The agency understands the need to ensure that the debt is sustainable rather than an added burden that does not remove the constraints the country is facing. While the economy is recovering, there is still uncertainty moving forward. The removal of this uncertainty depends very much on the governments commitment and ability to implement economic and structural reforms. A special arrangement Mr Ye emphasised the importance of investment in reviving the economy and the role the Special Investment Facilitation Council (SIFC) could play. My understanding of SIFC is that it is a special arrangement to attract foreign direct investment from some targeted countries, he said. From the ADBs point of view, while the SIFC may be a quick short-term solution, Pakistan still needs to look for long-term systematic solutions to attract foreign direct investment. This would require an overall enabling environment with improved regulations and transparency. Given past unsuccessful incidents such as Reko Diq, SIFC, at least in the short run, can demonstrate the countrys potential and ability for investment, which can then be further broadened for other countries. An important element in attracting FDI is the ability of firms to repatriate profit out of the country. At the moment, investors may believe that while earning money in Pakistan is possible, repatriating profits is challenging. Non-productivity of real estate The country needs to increase its revenue and rationalise expenditures, Mr Ye remarked. As an example, he highlights the real estate sector where a lot of savings are invested. The real estate sector is just financial addition with no value addition. If the country invests in its natural resources instead, the country will start rolling, he said. Inflation is on a downward trend, and if this trend continues, the monetary policy rate will come down, Mr Ye opinioned, resulting in a smaller burden of debt servicing and more fiscal room. This will also unlock the investment and borrowing by the private sector, he hoped. Since there is a lot of pent-up investment demand during the period of high interest rates, Pakistan may enter into a boom cycle when the rates start coming down. But for the revival to be sustainable, it all comes back to reforms, he said.  Remaining pledges While ADB was among the institutions that pledged support after the disastrous floods of 2022, almost the entire amount has yet to be disbursed. ADB had pledged about $1.5bn, of which only $108.79 million has been released according to a media report, with a further $340.9m expected this year. In response to why there has been a delay, Mr Ye said that the amount pledged was for reconstruction and that the process cannot be rushed. The damages have to be assessed along with the ground realities, keeping in mind the new climate risk profile and the possibility that these areas may be flooded again, he said. Pointing out that water was still standing in some areas till the start of this year, Mr Ye said that the new climate risk profile needs to be assessed before the feasibility study. Some roads need to be redesigned, followed by the procurement process, contract award, and finally, disbursement. The entire process is lengthy. Mr Ye identified several critical areas for Pakistans long-term economic growth. These include controlling inflation, reducing the fiscal deficit, and diversifying the export base. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Govt hints at raising wheat purchase target
Description :  Drive to buy 400,000 tonnes of grain kicks off; farmers want wheat procured from across Punjab
 Kissan leader urges govt to ensure official rate of staple, terms proposed subsidy a pittance LAHORE: The Pakistan Agricultural Storage and Services Corporation Limited (Passco) on Saturday began its second phase of wheat procurement from Faisalabad in line with a decision of the federal government to procure 400,000 tonnes more than the original target of 1.4 million tonnes. As he kick-started the second phase, Food Minister Rana Tanveer hinted at the possibility of further increasing the target to facilitate farmers. Passco had originally aimed to purchase 1.4m tonnes, but after farmers started protesting, the pressure on the federal and provincial governments piled on and the premier decided to increase the target to 1.8m tonnes. As of now, Passco has achieved 98 per cent of the initial target and distribution of gunny bags is already underway to meet the increased target. Farmers, however, are not happy with the governments decision to procure slightly more wheat than intended. They said Passco  a federal body  operated in 13 out of 97 tehsils in Punjab and the decision to purchase additional wheat from designated areas would have a negligible impact. According to farmers, the tradeable surplus this year is expected to be about 10m tonnes and buying 400,000 tonnes would hardly make any difference. Punjab, on the other hand, is reluctant to procure wheat from growers despite province-wide agitations and the persistent stance of farmers. This has also caused a significant impact on the price of wheat, with the staple being sold at a rate much lower than the official price of Rs3,900 per 40kg. The Pakistan Kissan Ittehad claimed that farmers had lost Rs1,150 billion under the wheat head alone due to the crashing prices which reportedly dipped below Rs3,000 per 40kg. Instead of procurement, the Punjab government said it would compensate farmers with interest-free loans of Rs150bn. Kissan leader Khalid Mahmood Khokar, however, is not impressed, saying the paltry subsidy came at a cost of Rs1,150bn. Instead of this gimmickry, please ensure an officially declared price, which the provincial government had itself calculated, announced, and promised, Mr Khalid urged the Punjab government. The crisis Pakistan is going through the most difficult wheat season of its history, exacerbated by policy failure and the import of millions of tonnes of wheat shortly before the bumper harvest. The bumper crop followed a record import of 3.5m tonnes by the private sector allegedly due to the weakness of the caretaker regime.
Against the backdrop of such a huge import, hoarders also released their stock to earn profit. The releases of stock by the hoarders and the import of the commodity flooded the market and even met the entire domestic requirement, leaving Passco and the Punjab Food Department with 4m tonnes of unexhausted stock. The 3.5m tonnes imports were staggered in a way, in the name of sustained supplies, that it overlapped with domestic harvesting season and created havoc for the domestic market, explained Muhammad Ramzan, a wheat trader from Lahore. At the start of this month, the Punjab government had promised a probe into the wheat scandal against the backdrop of protests by the farmers. On Friday, the farmers resumed their protests from Multan against the provincial governments decision to not buy wheat from farmers. At the protest, PKI leader Khokhar had said the agitation would continue against the government in every district of the province till the acceptance of their demands. He had said the federal government was procuring the wheat in 16 tehsils of the province, while the Punjab government had not purchased even a single grain so far. Federal government should also buy wheat from other tehsils of the province, he had demanded. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : KP governor, CM Gandapur exchange threats in acrid spat
Description : PESHAWAR / DERA ISMAIL KHAN: The acrimony between Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Chief Minister Ali Amin Khan Gandapur and Governor Faisal Karim Kundi intensified on Saturday when the two leaders threatened each other with dire consequences. A day after the governors fiery speech, Chief Minister Gandapur warned Governor Kundi to stay within the limits of his constitutional position and avoid making olitical statements. After appearing in an anti-terrorism court in connection with the murder of former KP law minister Sardar Israrullah Khan Gandapur, the CM who belongs to the PTI said he could use his powers to banish Mr Kundi from Governor House. This Governor House is not your property. Dont force me to  turn it into a museum and open it for the public.
I will shift you to a two-room annexe, said Mr Gandapur. He went on to say that even fuel for the governors official vehicles comes from the budget of the provincial government and threatened to stop it if the governor who belongs to PPP didnt refrain from political statements, below-the-belt remarks and confrontation. Gandapur warns Kundi will be banished from official residence for indulging in politics, confrontation Youre the governor; politics is not your job, Mr Gandapur warned, calling himself the elected representative who came to power with the voters mandate. The CM added that if the governor did not pay heed to his warning, he would seek his removal. [T]he letter which notified you [as governor] will also denotify you. In a hard-hitting speech on Friday, Governor Kundi had indirectly accused the CM of being involved in the killing of former law minister Mr Israrullah and ANP leader Umar Khattab Sherani.
Mr Israrullah was killed in a suicide attack in his hometown of Kulachi near Dera Ismail Khan in October 2013. While government officials blamed the Waziristan-based Gandapur group for the bombing, a little-known shadowy group, Ansarul Mujahideen, claimed responsibility. ANPs Mr Sherani was murdered in December 2021, a day before the provinces local government elections, which he was contesting as a candidate for the post of D.I. Khan mayor. The governor said that if he relinquished his constitutional post, he would prove to be a bigger nemesis for CM Gandapur. Mr Kundi also warned that protecting the Governor House was his constitutional duty and whoever tried to occupy it would be dragged on roads. This was an apparent reply to Mr Gandapurs May 9 statement in which he warned against efforts to impose governors rule in KP and said PTI activists would occupy the Governor House. Want good ties with CM Meanwhile, in conversation with Dawn, Mr Kundi said he hoped for good relations with the chief minister, but whoever talked about occupying the Governor House will be answered befittingly. People of KP shouldnt suffer in the fight between the prime minister, governor and chief minister, he said, advising the provincial government to improve the law and order situation. He recalled the kidnapping of a sessions judge in Tank last month and claimed the chief minister paid extortion money for his release. Expected animosity The acrimonious relationship between the two leaders  both being bitter political rivals hailing from D.I.Khan  was expected since Mr Kundi was nominated for the post by his partys chairman, Bilawal Bhutto-Zardari. The CM expressed his disapproval of the appointment by not attending  Mr Kundis oath-taking ceremony last Saturday. A few days later, on May 8, the governor KP did not sign a summary moved by the provincial government to convene an assembly session, forcing the provincial government to requisition the session through the speaker to present the current fiscal budget, according to sources. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Footprints: the day the city of Karachi went berserk
Description : This article was originally published on May 12, 2017 KARACHI: Attempt after attempt fails to elicit comments from direct witnesses to the carnage that took place in Karachi on May 12 ten years ago. All these men served as judges in the countrys high courts and the apex court before they retired to re-join the legal fraternity as seasoned practitioners of the law. For each of my requests, I receive either excuse me, or sorry. Finally, one of them agrees to talk  but not openly.  Please dont mention my name, says the retired Sindh High Court judge as our conversation ends. You may write each and every word I have shared with you but not my name. I would prefer to be an anonymous source. One never knows here what can happen the next day: its better to stay away from even the memories of such controversial events. The ordeal he recalls of that bloody Saturday refreshes the grim memories of the city being under siege for nearly 24 hours, held hostage by forces in the face of whom even jurists and law-enforcers were helpless.  Two rival rallies had been planned that day  one by the legal fraternity, backed by parties then in the opposition, to welcome into the city the then deposed chief justice, Iftikhar Mohammed Chaudhry, and the other organised by the Muttahida Qaumi Movement (MQM), favoured by the then military dictator General Pervez Musharraf, in protest against the politicisation of the issue of the presidential reference against Mr Chaudhry. A certain level of fear had prevailed, but no one could have guessed the deeply disturbing events that were to follow  certainly not the then serving high court judge. I was travelling with my driver and armed guard to the Sindh High Court where the chief justice had to deliver an address when we were forced to stop near Sir Syed Girls College in Nazimabad, he says.  Armed motorcyclists surrounded his official, flag-bearing car, pulled out his driver and switched off its engine, seizing the keys. The bikers then bludgeoned the stationary car several times, so hard that its bumper fell off. In one of the busiest and most densely populated city neighbourhoods, a serving judge sat in fear.  I talked to them, he says. They were obviously aware that I was a high court judge. After debate and argument, they allowed me to leave but I reminded them that I couldnt because keys of my car had been snatched by one of them. Finally, the key was returned and the judge was allowed to leave. As he got back into his car, the men surrounding him came up with their last strike: they stripped his car of the national flag. At the nearest police station of Pak Colony, he waited for nearly two hours for police security to arrive, as promised by the Governors House after it was informed about the episode. Then came an SSP-ranking officer with his team to escort me, he says. The police left us some two kilometres from the Singh High Court building, saying that they could no longer help us. My driver parked the car at a safer place. Then, with my driver and guard, I walked to the high court to find all entrances blocked. Finally, I jumped over one of the walls to enter the building. If this was the experience of a high court judge, one can only imagine the situation for political workers. In anticipation of the two rallies, law enforcers had been put on high alert the day before. The fire brigade had been directed to remain on standby and hospitals were asked to ready themselves. But the next day, hapless citizens found that the city had been abandoned by the law-enforcement agencies, and armed youths were wandering at will. Nasir Khan, one of the Awami National Party workers, witnessed a few of them at Malir Halt. I meet Nasir almost at the same spot where he narrowly escaped death. As our rally from Quaidabad reached here [Malir Halt], it came under fire, he says. I miraculously remained unhurt but I watched two of my friends die from bullet wounds and several others fell injured. It was a terrible experience and even today I shiver while recalling that day. After 10 years, only eyewitness accounts of the May 12 events remain. Justice and any action on the part of the state are still awaited. Should we call ourselves humanity when the fallen remain un-avenged a year to a day since that fateful day in May? wrote Justice Qazi Faez Isa, a Supreme Court judge and former chief justice of the Balochistan High Court, in this paper in 2008. Years later, the question remains pertinent. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2017  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Mothers Day: Reflections of a mother
Description : This piece was originally published in Dawn, Young World on May 9, 2020. Spending sleepless nights while tending to children, feeding them, changing diapers, etc. are a part of life of every mother having infants. When the infants grow up a little, the next phase is to educate them, teach them manners and make them learn to be a part of the world out there. It is tough to do all that for me, like every other mother. After all it is not all I have to do. One has to focus on ones career and household chores at the same time, and fulfil ones duties towards other family members. Did I mention a me-time somewhere in all that I said? I guess not. There is no mentioning of it simply because there is no time left for me while doing all that I do. It is said that you learn about the true value of parents once you have children of your own. I have found this to be exactly true. The sacrifices and unconditional love it takes to be a mother has certainly made me realise the sacrifices my mother made in bringing me up. Looking back at my life, I wish I could change all those moments in my life when, as a child, I misbehaved with my mother. I also wish that I had spent more time with her and made life easier for her. As my children grow up, they seem to become less obedient and respectful. This really hurts. I see this as a general trend in all the children, nowadays. With some exceptions, the older they get, the less respect they show to their mother and elders in general. Having a mind of ones own is fine, but there cannot be any excuse for bad behaviour towards ones mother. And also just because your mother is less strict and more friendly than your father, it should not lead you to not show respect to her. Mothers like me do not want our children to be our puppets. All we ask for is recognition of our love and efforts. Expecting respectfulness is a part of that recognition. Every mother would love her child to come up to her and, as a minimum, thank her for her efforts. It would be great if the child could offer to help her in little ways. If nothing else, they should at least not leave any mess for the mother to clean up! Mothers Day is important, but it is more than just a special day. It is really a reminder that mothers deserve our respect and recognition for their love at all times. For a child to have this realisation certainly means more to mothers than having a card or flowers on Mothers Day. This is because it means that this realisation would translate into care and respect for ones mother. For my part, I have started taking care of my mother in all the ways I can. While I do not live with her, I try my best to stay in touch or visit her as much as I can. Taking care of her health and what she wants has become very important for me. It does not matter to me what others do or say about taking care of their mothers. All that matters is what my mother deserves. And that exactly is my message to you all! Do not look at what others do, think of what you can do for your mother, who deserves all the love and respect that one can. Mothers can be your friends too if you learn to share things with her. It is just a misunderstanding that they would not understand you or what you want. You can talk about anything with her: sports, cartoons, TV shows, super heroes, general knowledge, etc. You would be pleasantly surprised when you do end up confiding in her or discussing things with her. I am lucky that I get cards and flowers from my family on Mothers Day. But many things remain left to be desired on the other 364 days of the year. Still whatever my children do the rest of the year, I would never stop caring for and loving them. I guess thats what the motherhood is all about. Happy Mothers Day everyone, but make every day Mothers Day, for she never fails to make everyday special for her children. Published in Dawn, Young World, May 9th, 2020 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Indian elections
Description : THE Islamophobic rhetoric being employed by Narendra Modi for this election campaign has become shrill. Pakistan has nearly always been an electoral issue in India. However, this time, it is Indian Muslims who are bearing the brunt of the Indian prime ministers hate speech. Speaking in Rajasthan last month, he called Muslims infiltrators and said they produce too many children. In Gujarat, where, as chief minister, he had overseen the massacre of Muslims in 2002, he accused the Congress of seeking to loot Indias wealth and redistribute it among Muslims, and of organising a vote jihad against his leadership. Later, he accused the Congress and Muslims of stealing Hindu wealth and property.
Modis inflammatory rhetoric was followed by the BJPs campaign video portraying Muslims as outsiders who plundered Indias wealth. As concerns grew about communal violence, the video was removed. These allegations are a sequel to Modis public referencing of earlier conspiracy theories of love jihad (Muslims forcibly converting Hindu women and marrying them to increase the Muslim population) or land jihad (capturing land to construct religious structures and gaining control of Indias territory). Concerns that his rhetoric might incite further violence against Indian Muslims are increasing. Ordinarily, since Hindus are in a majority in India, it may be difficult to question the rationale of creating a Hindu state. However, two observations are in order. One, the expansionist designs of the cherished Hindu state seek the creation of an Akhand Bharat, a Hindu right fantasy, which would violate the territorial integrity of Nepal, Bangladesh, Pakistan, and Afghanistan, as per a map displayed in the new parliament building. This is not acceptable to the aforementioned independent states. Two, though the creation of a Hindu state should not translate into discrimination against minorities, regrettably this will be the case. The works of French political scientist Christophe Jaffrelot illustrate how Muslims, 14.5 per cent of Indias population, are grossly underrepresented in bureaucracy, the judiciary, police, and legislative organs. They are second-class citizens.
The Muslim-majority area of Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmiri is also being subjected to demographic engineering. The destruction of the centuries-old Babri Masjid by Hindu zealots in 1992 and the construction of a temple in its place has set a precedent that might be followed for other historic mosques. This contrasts sharply with the UAEs gesture of permitting a Hindu temple in Abu Dhabi. Modis anti-Muslim rhetoric is raising concerns of violence. Analysts are also pointing out the fascist tendencies of the BJP regime, a steep decline in democratic values, and a departure from the moorings of pluralism and secularism on which modern India was founded. In her book The Incarcerations, Alpa Shah contends that Modis India is using its national security apparatus to incarcerate ordinary citizens for their dissenting views. Commenting on the book, Arundhati Roy stated that this was about criminalisation and incarceration of dissent itself. Strikingly, the Modi regime has also used art and culture to project the Hindutva philosophy. Kunal Purohits book H-Pop: The Secretive World of Hindutva Pop Stars shows how Hindutva pop stars and influencers are being used to spread the message of Hindu supremacy and create acceptance of Hindutvas core beliefs. Apart from this, Modi is playing on his governments accomplishments: making India the worlds fifth largest economy; the construction of 50,000 kilometres of national highways; boosting Indias military spending; building Vikrant, Indias first domestically built aircraft carrier; and the Chandrayaan-3 moon landing. His prospects of winning a third term have been bolstered by a weak opposition. Despite the formation of the Congress-led 37-party INDIA coalition, there is no real challenge. What has bolstered his outreach is Indias enhanced global standing. In his book Why Bharat Matters, S. Jaishankar presents India as a leader of the global south and makes a case for the rejuvenation of India as a civilisational state.
There are some lessons that Pakistan could learn from Indias electoral process. One, despite the large scale of Indias elections (969 million registered voters; 1m polling stations) and the use of electronic voting machines, election results are largely accepted without much ado. Two, there is no caretaker government, as the incumbents become caretakers in a way, and refrain from announcing major policy decisions or sanctioning expenditure for development schemes. If Modi wins a third term, he is likely to maintain his pro-Hindutva, anti-Muslim, and hegemonic attitude towards regional countries, particularly Pakistan. The write is a former foreign secretary and chairman of Sanober Institute Islamabad. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Who can rock the hybrid boat?
Description : A NUMBER of developments over the past week suggest that the establishment is keen to enforce/ maintain the status quo and the only impediment in its path may be an assertive superior judiciary that has been increasingly finding its feet in recent weeks. If jailed PTI leader and former prime minister Imran Khans article in UKs conservative right-wing Telegraph newspaper blaming the military leadership directly for all his woes the week before was not hint enough of the state of play, two public statements by the latter clarified issues rather unambiguously. The first came in the DG ISPRs press briefing, which was ostensibly called to discuss Afghanistan-based terrorist groups involvement in attacks on Chinese nationals working on development projects in the country. But in response to a couple of questions about the PTI and Imran Khan related to the events of May 9 last year, the DG ISPR stated unequivocally that the only path to rehabilitation for the political party and its leaders was to seek forgiveness for attacking your own forces.
Then, perhaps, talks could happen and that too with political parties (ie, the government), as the military had nothing to do with politics. Imran Khan has been consistent in saying he wouldnt talk to the powerless political parties and that a meaningful dialogue is possible only with the military. The DG ISPR also lamented the delay in the prosecution and sentencing of all those responsible for the May mayhem  including the leaders and mastermind against whom irrefutable evidence has been gathered and submitted  and, in doing so, appeared to hint at the establishments frustrations with what it perceives as roadblocks being erected by the judiciary. The content of the live presser evoked an equally adamant response from the PTI, which went on the offensive, reiterating its stance that May 9 was a false flag operation, accusing the militarys spokesman of being economical with the truth, and saying it would be happy to live with the findings of an impartial judicial commission into the May 9 events and would even apologise if found to be at fault. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. The military spokesman had pre-empted this demand in his briefing earlier by saying if a probe were to happen, as was being demanded, it ought to start with 2014, and not nine years later. The 2014 PTI sit-in in the federal capital was said to have been instigated and backed by the then ISI chief. This was the first indication that the military was prepared to hold its own accountable for past follies, if it paved the way for the trials and sentencing of PTI leaders it says were responsible for the attacks on defence installations in a number of cities in Punjab and KP. While the spokesman left nothing to the imagination, on the first anniversary of May 9, the army chief added his voice to his chief spokesmans in terms of stressing the need for punishing the perpetrators of the violence a year earlier, also lashing out against what he called digital terrorism.
This indicates that harsher curbs on social media are planned. So far, the PTI has had overwhelming social media dominance and had been able to keep a step ahead of its adversaries, but we will find out soon whether it has what it takes to bypass software the Chinese have developed over the years (and Pakistan has reportedly acquired) and successfully used to block dissident content. With this ever-widening gulf between the establishment and the party it once saw as a panacea for all that ails Pakistan, the one thing that many felt could force a rethink in the establishment would have been a public manifestation of the immense support enjoyed by the PTI, as evidenced in last Februarys elections. Many Pakistan watchers keenly waited all day for multitudes of PTI supporters to spill out onto the roads and streets of major urban conurbations on the party leaders call to break the shackles and protest on May 9. But the brutal crackdown of the past one year seems to have knocked the wind out of the partys sails and worn down the workers will. People may turn out to vote for it in droves, but did not appear prepared to risk life, limb and liberty in coming out for mass protests. Some small localised protests did happen, but had zero impact in the sense of influencing decision-making in the corridors of power. Going forward, a couple of factors will play a role in steering developments. The first and foremost will be the confidence the army chief has in his control over his institution. His predecessor appointed a dozen major generals to three stars in his final six weeks in office and left the incumbent little room in terms of forming his own team. Natural attrition and the more dramatic exit of a couple of three stars on disciplinary grounds recently has, 18 months down the line, given the chief an opportunity to place senior officers of his own choosing in key roles which will give him greater freedom of action both inside and outside the institution. The promotion of three officers this week, including the DG ISPR, to three stars was another step in that direction. The military saw May 9 as a coup against the chief, a failed attempt to dislodge him from office. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. With the PTI protests failing to gather momentum, the only impediment in his path seems to be an increasingly assertive superior judiciary. It can and will, in all likelihood, challenge the establishments pre-eminence in decision-making. It isnt clear how the latter plans to deal with that, especially because it believes that a direly needed economic revival is only possible under the umbrella of a hybrid set-up and in a relatively calm political environment. Only the judiciary can rock its boat now. The writer is a former editor of Dawn. abbas.nasir@hotmail.com Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Looming pension crisis cries out for corrective measures
Description : Pension reform is again a hot topic, but this time, bureaucrats will make it appear as if it is intended to benefit top officials. The reforms go beyond just raising the retirement age or taxing pensions. Instead, a series of actions, similar to those that were done in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP), should be seriously considered to reduce the cost of pensions to the government exchequer. The national pension cost will reach nearly Rs2 trillion in FY24, and it is predicted to rise to Rs10tr in the next decade if no reforms are implemented. In 2002-03, the pension cost stood at Rs25 billion, but in a span of just 20 years, it skyrocketed to over Rs1.5tr. Pension reforms have previously been tested in KP and generated the expected cost-saving results. It is high time to rationalise the existing pension programme and transition to more modern schemes available in developing and developed countries. Last week, Finance Minister Muhammad Aurangzeb proposed to raise the retirement age from 60 to 65 years. It has sparked controversy over whether the government intends to benefit only a select few individuals. This decision has both advantages and disadvantages. In KP, the age restriction was raised to 63 years in 2019 with a projected annual savings of Rs20bn. However, the decision was reversed due to strong protest from bureaucrats, and the court also overturned the decision. However, KPs other pension reforms remained in effect. KP Advisor on Finance Muzzammil Aslam has a different take on raising the age restriction than his predecessor, who implemented a series of reforms. Mr Aslam believes that the lump sum payment of pension payments will be delayed for the next five years, providing some breathing room for the time being. This will allow the government to show a lower budget deficit. The net impact will increase when the five-year allowances are added to the basic salary, which will be used to pay the pension. The age extension will postpone payments, but total payouts to employees will climb over the following five years. While these efforts provide some relief in the short term, crucial steps must be implemented to address the increasing pension liabilities. The governments liabilities have jumped from Rs25bn in FY03 to Rs2tr in FY24 There is another idea to tax pensions. It may also face political challenges. However, the KP government has imposed a 5pc pension tax on grades 17 and above on their executive allowance. It is estimated that this measure alone will generate Rs150bn in contributions to a pay-as-you-go pension system. This was not an easy decision, but it was made in KP to obtain some contribution from existing employees. The federal government can look into this step in response to opposition to taxing pensions. KP reforms In 2004, based on recommendations from a World Bank project, the India implemented a national pension scheme wherein employee contributions are matched by the government. Pakistan did not choose to adopt it since it was not anticipated that the cost would rise so dramatically over the next 20 years. Taimur Khan Jhagra, former finance minister of KP, took the lead in implementing a series of pension reforms, including the introduction of a contributory pension scheme for new employees beginning July 1, 2022. Few substantial changes were made to the existing pension programme. A well-known 13-tier pension system was in place, covering the pensioners widow, children, parents, siblings, sisters, and grandchildren. KP confined it to direct dependents. The federal government did the same last year, but other provinces have not followed suit. The previous PTI government raised KP and Punjabs minimum retirement age to 55 from 45, reducing KPs pension bill by Rs20bn alone. KP consolidated various pensions into a single one. Previously, individuals could receive two pensions simultaneously, with an active employee receiving both a salary and a pension. The major reform is the implementation of a contributing pension scheme for new employees. Under this programme, the KP government contributes 12pc and employees contribute 10pc. So far, 40,000 staff have been hired under this system starting July 1, 2022. There are additional critical reforms that the KP and federal governments should implement, such as revisiting the single Universal Pay Scale between Grades 1 and 22. Pay in provinces is decoupled from the Centre and between departments, allowing each department to develop a pay scale appropriate for their budget and the market value of their professions. Pension reforms are greatly needed. The question is whether the state will be able to sustain pension payments for the next 10 to 15 years. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : SMOKERS CORNER: KHAN AND THE GENERALS
Description : In May 2023, a recorded phone call  allegedly between the mother-in-law of the former Chief Justice of Pakistan (CJP) Umar Atta Bandial, and the wife of a lawyer-member of Imran Khans populist Pakistan Tehreek-i-Insaf (PTI)  was leaked on social media. In the call, the two ladies can be heard criticising the coalition government made up of the parties that had ousted Khans regime in April 2022 through an act of parliament. At one point in the leaked conversation, the mother-in-law laments, Yeh kambakht martial law bhi tau nahin lagaatay! [These cursed people dont even impose martial law!] Bykambakht,she meant the military establishment (ME). The conversation was surreal on many levels. Khan had been the blue-eyed boy of the ME, until he had a falling out with his makers. From 2011 till he was elected as prime minister in 2018, the ME had successfully shaped Khans political rise in a highly coordinated manner. His popularity was first established within the rank and file of the military. Then, some TV journalists were brought on board, followed by the induction of some vital members of the judiciary.
This troika  the ME, the electronic media and the judiciary  was complimented by the trained social media wing of Khans PTI to proliferate narratives pitched against the two older mainstream parties, the Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) and the Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP). The two were deeply demonised as being corrupt. After his ouster, Imran Khan was convinced that the establishment had betrayed him, and the May 9-10 protests last year were an attempt to rally support amongst pro-Khan factions in the military. However, any military intervention was drastically overestimated by his supporters A constituency that had initially been built by the former military dictator Gen Pervez Musharraf, and which mostly consisted of middle-class and upper-middle-class Pakistanis, was navigated by the ME and the media in such a manner that it eventually fell in Khans lap. This became a quadrilateral elite, comprising the ME, the media, the judiciary and the middle classes. After Khans ouster in April 2022, he began to publicly lambast the ME, accusing it of betraying him. But the truth is, due to the many abject failures of Khans government, the ME had begun to gradually distance itself from him months before he was ousted. In February 2022, Bandial became the CJP. He was cut from the same cloth that at least four of his predecessors were. These included Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry and, even more so, Justice Saqib Nasir, Justice Asif Khosa and Justice Gulzar Ahmad. Anti-PTI parties often accused them of being overtly pro-Khan. Justice Bandial was accused of having a soft corner for Khan. Truth is, Bandial wasnt very good at hiding this soft corner. Now the question is, during the time of the aforementioned phone call leak, when Khan was holding angry rallies and condemning the ME, why was Bandials mother-in-law yearning for a military takeover? Equally surreal was the presence of banners in some pro-Khan rallies with We Want Martial Law written on them. Also, why did the PTI  by planning last years violent riots on May 9 and 10, in which PTI supporters and members attacked military property  believe that this would cause a split in the armed forces and bring pro-Khan generals to power? Many academics who study coups are of the view that, if the conditions allow, street protests can be followed by a coup detat. According to the political scientist Scott A Tyson, protests are often a signal to the elites to intervene.
The elites in this context are the military and political elites. These may also include the higher judiciary and business elites. A regime facing the protests, too, is made up of political elites. Once the anti-regime elites decide that the protests are clearly signalling for an intervention, this is then communicated to the state elites. The media too plays a role in this. Its reporting of the protests may strengthen the signal and galvanise the military to intervene. The mother-in-laws kambakht lament was expressing a desperate yearning within sections of economic elites for military intervention. This nature of signalling was loud and clear on numerous WhatsApp groups when Khan was holding rallies against his ouster. The signal became even more obvious when the We Want Martial Law banners began to appear at the rallies. Some media personnel also started enhancing the signal to the ME. But by late 2022, the MEs top leadership had changed. A general who had earlier exited the project that was set up to facilitate Khans rise became the new army chief. Yet, PTI believed that many remnants of the project were still active within the military. I believe that with the judiciary still in facilitation mode, the notion of causing a split within the military to replace the new military chief with pro-Khan generals was the brainwave of some retired military men who were well-versed in the theories of post-protest coups. Once the signal to intervene in Khans post-ouster rallies was ignored by the new ME, a violent uprising was conceived that was to target the new ME. The uprising was enacted to evoke the concerns of the supposed pro-Khan generals. The signal now was: eject the new army chief and intervene (on the side of Khan) to avoid an all-out civil war. This plan could not have been formulated without the input of some retired officers. Many of them had been quite vocal in their support for Khan.
The violent May 9 and 10 protests were orchestrated by a political elite (PTI) against another set of elites (the coalition government) to signal the need for an intervention to judicial and military elites. But, according to Tyson, whether or not a coup will succeed is generally not certain to elites. This uncertainty is caused by the uncertainty regarding the actions of other elites. The other elite, in the context of the May 9 and 10 riots, was the military. An intervention by pro-Khan officers was drastically overestimated by the planners and the plan collapsed. The coalition government was able to withstand the assault. The new military chief began to swiftly oust the remaining pro-Khan elements from the military  even though those remaining in the judiciary are now trying to avoid suffering a similar fate through a pushback in the name of the independence of the judiciary.This, too, is quite surreal. Published in Dawn, EOS, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : A turbulent 2023
Description : PAKISTAN faced a tumultuous year in 2023 marked by severe economic distress and a sharp erosion of civil liberties. As documented in the HRCPs annual report, the year was nothing short of a human rights crisis on multiple fronts. Economic hardship was pervasive, with back-breaking inflation  nearly 40pc  and low growth hitting the common citizen the hardest. Protests were widespread, ranging from government employees striking against delayed salaries and pension issues to political demonstrations demanding timely elections. The state responded with indifference and sometimes outright violence, underlining its disregard for the peoples constitutional rights. The political arena was no less strained: the year saw unprecedented violence following the arrest of former prime minister Imran Khan; subsequent PTI-led riots were met with harsh government crackdowns. This included mass arrests and the controversial use of military courts for civilian trials. Political dissent was stifled and freedom of speech curtailed with internet shutdowns and media gags on reporting of certain political leaders. Sadly, the governments management of the turmoil involved significant overreach, impacting judicial independence and skewing the electoral landscape. The swift passage of laws granting sweeping powers to intelligence agencies and restricting media freedoms points to the governments alarming propensity to consolidate power at the cost of transparency and accountability.
Human rights violations were not limited to political suppression. The report highlights severe abuses such as enforced disappearances, alleged extrajudicial killings and custodial torture by state agencies. The societal impact of these policies and actions has been devastating. Moreover, marginalised communities, including women, children, religious minorities, and transgender persons, faced increased violence and discrimination. Notable too was the harsh crackdown on peaceful assemblies like the Baloch Yakjehti Councils protests. On the international front, despite engaging with global human rights mechanisms, Pakistans selective adherence to recommendations concerning enforced disappearances and the use of the death penalty reflected a reluctance to fully align with international human rights standards. Rulers would do well to remember that adhering to those standards will help maintain Pakistans desperately needed GSP-Plus status and be a more inviting place for foreign investment.
As the year proceeds, it is imperative for the state to reconsider its approach to human rights. The government must ensure the independence of the judiciary, respect for democratic processes, and protection for all citizens against the abuse of power. Laws that infringe on freedom of expression and assembly should be reviewed and reformed. Additionally, there should be a concerted effort to address the economic inequalities that underpin much of the social unrest. For a stable and prosperous Pakistan, human rights must be more than an ideal; they must be an integral part of governance and everyday life. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Love knows no boundaries at Karachis Edhi Home nursery for special children
Description : KARACHI: Its one day to Mothers Day and the childrens nursery at the Edhi Home in Mithadar is decorated with balloons and posters along with framed photographs of the late couple Abdul Sattar Edhi and Bilquis Edhi. Children in the classrooms are busy making greeting cards, drawing pictures of themselves and the only woman whom they have come to know as their mother, their Chhoti (younger) Mummy Sabah Faisal Edhi. The duties of the busy mother of so many children, including four of her own, starts from early morning. After tending to her own household duties and sending off her youngest, Moosa Edhi, to school, she is in the nursery at 8am sharp, inquiring from the staff there if everyone had a good sleep, if anyone had any issues during the night. It has become a habit with her to visit the nursery first to inquire about her babies before getting to her other work of calling up the other Edhi Homes and Centres, asking about the other children, their health and school progress, asking about the women in their Homes, tending to the marriage proposals, and adoption procedures and planning outings and picnics for the children. When parents discover their babies are not well, they quietly leave them in our cot, says Sabah Edhi as country celebrates Mothers Day today But today, before she can go inside the nursery, she stops in the playroom to admire three-year-old Fatimas greeting her with a broad smile and a happy dance. Chhoti Mummy hugs the child and gestures to know if she has eaten breakfast. Fatima is deaf and mute. She has only recently been fitted with a cochlear implant, which has enabled her to hear and appreciate music to which she loves to dance. It is quite obvious that Sabahs favourite in the nursery is five-year-old Moosa, named by Mummy, Bilquis Edhi, herself, after her own youngest grandson, Sabah and Faisals youngest son Moosa. But this Moosa, even though he is five, doesnt look more than a year old. His growth is stunted. Sabah lifts him out of his cot and cuddles him lovingly. The nursery only has special children or children with learning disabilities. Moosa was the last child here named by Bilquis Edhi. The rest have been given names by their Chhoti Mummy. There are two newborn baby girls, Aimen and Noor Fatima, peacefully sleeping in their cradles in the cheerful blue nursery. Both the babies are blind. The moment some parents discover that all is not well with their babies they quietly leave them in our cot, says Sabah. They never return for them, she sighs. Parents of very sick children, too, disown them even when they know that their child doesnt have much time to live. We take them in, find them the best of medical care till the last of their breath, she adds. On discovering a child in the cot, we first try to get information about who left him or her there followed by a thorough medical check-up. If they are in need of medical care, we make sure that they receive the best that there is. Just the other day, someone left a little girl suffering from diarrhoea. She had to be hospitalised, she informs. Just then one little girl, of about four years of age, who also looks like she is considerably attached to her Chhoti Mummy walks in and runs up to her. She is normal. There is nothing wrong with this one, Sabah says. She says her name is Manahil. We found her near Sohrab Goth. Most of the children in our Sohrab Goth Centre are much older so I brought her here with me until we can find her parents, she informs. By the grace of God, there is no shortage of space, love and care in this Home built for these children by Edhi Sahab and Mummy, she says, kissing the childs head. All children are a blessing, a priceless gift from God. I wish the parents who discard their children like or neglect them would realise this. I wish such parents could love their special, disabled or sick children like they love their normal children, she says. Sometimes, these very children who they love so much because they are normal and healthy grow up to discard their parents when they are old and weak. Thats the story of so many old people in our homes, she concludes. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Documentary on Dr Aafia Siddiqui launched in Karachi
Description : KARACHI: Aafia Siddiqui  The True Story, a documentary by Friends of Aafia, was launched here at the Karachi Press Club (KPC) on Saturday. The documentary shed light on various aspects of the life of Dr Aafia from her birth, education, marriage and to her kidnapping in Karachi and confinement in a notorious US prison.
View this post on Instagram
Aafias sister Dr Fowzia Siddiqui and Muslim Matters Editor-in-chief Hena Zuberi and others spoke at the event. Dr Fowzia said that her sister Dr Aafia was a gifted child, a bright scholar and a loving and caring person. She got a PhD degree in neurosciences from Brandies University of the US and it was her dream to revolutionise education system in Pakistan. In the documentary, human rights lawyer Clive Stafford Smith, who currently represents Dr Aafia, said a vast majority of the American people had no idea who Dr Aafia was and they also did not care.
He said that she has suffered a lot in the US prison and braved all sorts of torture. El-Hajj Mauri Saalakhan, the founding president and director of operations at The Aafia Foundation, told the documentary makers that after 9/11, the US targeted the human rights and liberties of people, especially Muslims. He said Dr Aafia also fell prey to this victimisation and in 2003 she was kidnapped, along with her children, in Karachi and got disappeared on mere suspicion that her husband had bought online night vision goggles. Umme Muhammad, the president of the Musawemem Campaign, said for the last 15 years she had been linked to the case of Dr Aafia but disappointingly nothing more could be achieved.
She said Dr Aafia was targeted only because she was Muslim. Yvonne Ridley was amongst the first investigative journalists who told the world that Dr Aafia was jailed in Afghanistan. Talking about the grey lady prisoner of Bigram jail, she said in those times the US administration would dehumanise the prisoners and the same was done to Dr Aafia. She was wounded by the US soldiers and in injured condition she was brought to the US and tried by a court in a highly biased manner and jailed for long 86 years, which means the rest of her life. Zeina El-Debis, leader of the Friends of Aafia and founder of the Shade of Mercy Foundation, talked about their efforts to get Dr Aafia repatriated on humanitarian grounds. She said the documentary was also a part of such efforts. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Situationer: Riverine region in the crosshairs of militia violence
Description : DESPITE a year-long anti-dacoit operation in upper Sindhs riverine area, the dacoit factor remains an enigma for the provincial police. The situation took a new turn on May 5 when the Bugtis, allegedly backed by the Punjab police and equipped with military-grade weapons, infiltrated the riverine area of Rwanti in Ghotki, which lies on the Sindh-Punjab border, adding a new layer of complexity to the ongoing operation. The recent incident has once again laid bare the seeming helplessness of the Sindh police, sparking outrage among the provinces intelligentsia. The scourge of dacoits has long plagued parts of northern Sindh, with the governments efforts to eradicate them yielding little success. Despite continued endeavours to tackle the issue, the desired results remain elusive. The Kalpar Bugtis, led by their chief Jalal Kalpar Bugti, claimed to have exacted revenge for the murder of his 30-year-old son, Abdul Rehman Kalpar, by killing two prominent dacoits from the Shar community and injuring half a dozen others. The incident occurred in the Machhko police station area, which falls under the jurisdiction of the Punjab police. The dacoits killed were identified as Alim alias Almo Shar, brother of Sanu Shar, and Hakim alias Haku Shar. Rehman Kalpar was ambushed and killed by dacoits on Feb 13 while he was travelling on the CPEC road in Ghotki district. Jalal Kalpar reached out to the Sindh police, seeking their assistance in avenging his sons murder, according to a senior police officer familiar with the situation. Dacoit issue remains an enigma for Sindh police Jalal Kalpar is unapologetic and straightforward in justifying his actions. I repeatedly reached out to the Ghotki police, but they ignored me. I went to perform Umrah, and upon my return, I was approached by the Punjab police to liaise with them and see how things work, he told Dawn over phone from Sui in Balochistan.
Jalal alleged that Ghotki police SSP Anwar Khetran made excuses, claiming that his force was outgunned by the dacoits, as they only had G-3 and Kalashnikov rifles. However, he added, Mr Khetran did acknowledge that geo-fencing evidence had confirmed the involvement of the Shar community in his sons murder. Punjab police sought help from me in terms of human resource and police would lead the offensive. My men were there as a cover. Finally, Shars were killed in Machko police limits of Punjab. Sindh police didnt do anything in this offence, Jalal alleged. Jalal Kalpar hails from those Bugti families who defied the late Nawab Akbar Bugti and were subsequently displaced from Dera Bugti, settling in Sindh. Following Rehmans killing, Jalal declared at a jirga in Sui that he would hold accountable those responsible, specifically targeting Shaharyar Shar, the chieftain of the Shar clan and a former PTI leader who later joined PPP. In an attempt to defuse the situation, Shar reached out to Jalal to clarify his position and maintain neutrality. Jalal conveyed message to Shaharyar that if Abid Hussain Jatoi, Abid Sundrani, or Gul Mohammad Jakhrani stand surety for him, only then will he talk to him. Only Gul Mohammad agreed, and he, along with Shaharyar, met Kalpar at his Sukkur residence, but names of Rahib Khan Shar and Sana Shar emerged as those responsible for Rehmans murder, a police officer said. Police post as Bugtis base A former SSP of Ghotki said that before the May 5 incident, Bugtis had started arriving in areas along the Sindh-Punjab border. They [Bugtis] wanted Bhaya-4 police post vacated by Sindh police. This post is manned by Ghotki police, but the area falls in Punjabs territorial limits. As they wanted to use this post as their operational base, but didnt find Ghotki police forthcoming in their response, so they turned to Punjab police eventually, said the officer. According to him, the Punjab police permitted the Bugtis to utilise the Camp-2 location, which was situated approximately 800 metres from Sanu Shars hideout. Its an ideal location from which they can confront the Shars comfortably, the officer added. Viral video images revealed that the Bugtis, armed with prohibited and military-grade weapons, disembarked from APCs in the katcha area. The ensuing gun battle, which lasted a couple of days, resulted in the deaths of two Shars and injuries to several others. The Bugtis then departed. According to a former SSP of Shikarpur, the military-grade weapons used were of 82mm dimension, a type commonly seen in Afghanistan. Dangerous precedent Professor Inam Shaikh, an analyst, says, The incident has set a dangerous precedent. He urges the Supreme Court to take suo motu notice. How can state collaborate with private persons? It amounts to creating private militia which otherwise means civil war. Supreme Court must step in to take action against police authorities and criminals for this illegal act, he insists. Naseer Memon, a writer, has analysed the situation from the perspective of good dacoits, bad dacoits and the economy of the katcha area. The recent episode of allowing one tribe to attack another in the katcha area can snowball this crime into a tribal warfare. This can flare up a bloodbath, he says. He believes that a multi-stakeholder economy, operating behind the scenes, drives the dacoits, kidnapping, and ransom industry in upper Sindh. A police official reveals that Rahib Shar has been primarily responsible for the kidnapping of people on the CPEC road and other areas. Meanwhile, Sanu Shar has been running a honey trap industry in the riverine area. According to another police officer, Rahib Shar is residing in Sindhs riverine area, while Sanu Shar is based in Punjabs limits. Actually, there is a strip of riverine land stretching over around 3-4km that falls in Sindh but administratively looked after by Rahim Yar Khan administration. Since Punjab police dont pay heed to this area much and Sindh police also remain inactive, it has become a sort of no mans land and a safe haven for outlaws, claims an SSP from lower Sindh. Bugtis aim to target Shars as a community, while the actual culprits, Rahib Shar and Sanu Shar, remain out of their reach. After the July 28, 2023, killing of notorious dacoits Janu Indher, Soomar Shar, Shahzado Dashti, Nazar Mohammad alias Nazroo alias Kato Shar, and Mubashir alias Mushir Indhar, the Sindh police chief was initially reluctant to take a position. However, the Sindh police later claimed credit for the operation. Meanwhile, the Punjab police also staked their claim. Nevertheless, the Sindh police asserted their right to the head money of Rs8.5 million fixed by the government against Janu, Soomar, and Shahzado. After the Bugtis onslaught on the Shars, Sanu Shar uploaded a video clarifying that he was not involved in Rehmans murder. However, this failed to appease Jalal Kalpar, who has temporarily withdrawn from the area but remains resolute in his vow to take on the Shars until Rehmans murderers are killed. I have no issues with Sindh or the Sindhi people, nor did I have any enmity with the Shars as a community. It is the Ganderi Shars, specifically Sannu, Moriyo, Jamal, and Rahib, who are responsible for my sons murder. So, my quest for vengeance is far from over, he declared. Despite repeated messages and calls, Ghotki SSP Sumair Noor Channa remained unavailable to explain whether criminal cases have been lodged in this regard. Similarly, Rahim Yar Khan SSP Rizwan Gondal did not reply to questions about how Punjab police are backing private militias to take on outlaws. A message was also sent to Sindh IG Ghulam Nabi Memon to get his side of the story, but no contact could be established with him. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Pakistans iCube-Qamar beams back first images from moons orbit
Description : Pakistans inaugural lunar satellite iCube-Qamar on Friday transmitted the first-ever images captured by it from the lunar orbit, the national space agency said. The satellite, part of Chinas Change-6 lunar mission, was launched from the Hainan province on May 3 and had successfully entered the moons orbit at 1:14pm on May 8. The moon is at an average distance of 384,400km from earth. The lunar module was designed by Islamabads Institute of Space Technology (IST) in collaboration with Chinas Shanghai University (SJTU) and Pakistans national space agency Suparco. The landmark images were unveiled at a ceremony organised at the China National Space Agency (CNSA) to mark the successful mission accomplishment, IST spokesperson and head of Department of Electrical and Computer Science, Dr Khurram Khursheed told Dawn.com. They were officially handed over to Pakistans ambassador to Beijing, she added.
View this post on Instagram
One of the first-ever images captured by Pakistans inaugural lunar satellite iCube-Qamar shows the moon and the sun.   Suparco/CNSA
The iCube-Q orbiter carries two optical cameras to image the lunar surface. The module is a cube satellite or cubesat  miniature satellites typically characterised by their small size and standardized cubic design. Due to their compact size and relatively low cost compared to traditional satellites, CubeSats offered opportunities for universities, research institutions and commercial entities to participate in space missions and gather valuable data for scientific advancement and innovation. Operating in extreme temperatures as low as minus 100 degrees Celsius, the satellite features a 7-kilogramme one-megapixel camera tailored for missions with power constraints.
Dr Khursheed had said the satellite would play a critical role in deep space missions. Its surface-level analysis capabilities, transmitting images at a modest 1-kbps, will provide crucial data on crater locations, water, and traces of ice on the moons surface, he had said. As the Chinese lander collects rock and soil samples, iCube-Q will spend three to six months orbiting the moon, capturing and transmitting images of the moon back to Earth. The IST said the opportunity to release the cubesat in lunar orbit from the Change-6 mission was offered by the CNSA through the Asia Pacific Space Cooperation Organisation (Apsco). After a thorough evaluation, Pakistans proposal was accepted out of all Apsco member states.
One of the first-ever images captured by Pakistans inaugural lunar satellite iCube-Qamar shows the sun shining brightly.   Suparco/CNSA
The Change-6 mission, which aims to explore the moons dark side, employs lunar research payloads from multiple countries, including Pakistans iCube-Qamar satellite. The mission is named after the mythical Chinese moon goddess. Nasa is banned by US law from any collaboration, direct or indirect, with China. On Change-6, China is carrying payloads from France, Italy, Sweden and Pakistan, while Change-7 will bear payloads from Russia, Switzerland and Thailand when it launches in 2026.
Change-6 aims to collect around 2kg of lunar samples from the far side of the Moon and bring them back to Earth for analysis. Chinese state news agency Xinhua had hailed it as the first endeavour of its kind in the history of human lunar exploration. China will send a robotic spacecraft in the coming days on a round trip to the moons far side in the first of three technically demanding missions that will pave the way for an inaugural Chinese crewed landing and a base on the lunar south pole. The probe is set to land in the immense South Pole-Aitken Basin, one of the largest known impact craters in the solar system. Once there, it will scoop up lunar soil and rocks, and carry out other experiments in the landing zone. With no direct line of sight with the Earth, Change-6 must rely on a recently deployed relay satellite orbiting the moon during its 53-day mission, including a never-before-attempted ascent from the moons hidden side on its return journey home. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : PIA staff forgets to put boys body on plane
Description :
SKARDU: Officials of PIA, the Civil Aviation Authority and police try to placate the protesting father of the deceased.Photo by the writer
GILGIT: In a heart-wrenching incident, a PIA flight from Islamabad to Skardu left behind the body of a six-year-old boy at the capitals airport on Friday, while his parents continued their journey, unaware of the shocking mistake. The parents of the deceased boy were shocked and fainted at Skardu airport when they came to know that their sons body had been left behind in Islamabad. Mujtaba, a resident of Katshi village of Kharmang district, was diagnosed with a tumour at a hospital in Skardu and doctors referred him to Rawalpindi for treatment a month ago. His father Muhammad Askari and mother took him to Rawalpindi and he had been under treatment at Benazir Bhutto Hospital for weeks. Mujtaba lost his life in the hospital on Thursday. The parents decided to transport the body of their child to their native village of Katshi for burial, through a PIA flight on Friday, as a 24-hour-long journey from Islamabad to Skardu by road with the body was not possible due to hot weather. Shocked parents, relatives protest against airline managements negligence at Skardu airport The deceased boys parents and another relative confirmed their tickets at flight PK-451 from Islamabad to Skardu on Friday morning. They brought the body to Islamabad airport at 6am and completed cargo procedure for the body after fulfilling SOPs and airlines rules and made the payment. Ibrahim Asadi, a relative of the deceased boy, told Dawn that the body was scheduled to be transported with the parents to Skardu from Islamabad at 9am. He said the flight was delayed for four hours and left Islamabad at 1pm. Upon arrival at Skardu airport at 2pm, the parents were informed that mistakenly the body was not loaded on the plane and left behind at Islamabad airport. The news sparked grief and outrage as parents were shocked and started crying while the boys mother and father fainted at the airport. The relatives of the boy waiting to receive the body also gathered at the airports lounge and started protest against the PIA managements negligence. It continued for three hours. Officials of PIA, Civil Aviation Authority and other departments, who were on duty at Skardu airport, tried to calm down the boys parents and relatives and admitted their mistake. They assured the parents of bringing back the body on Saturday (today). The PIA officials said the company, which handles cargos at the airport, is responsible for not loading the body and assured the parents that action would be taken against it for negligence. The boys parents and relatives chanted slogans against the PIA administration. They said the poor family had paid higher price to transport the body through the PIA flight, but the airline committed a serious negligence. They appealed to the government to take action against those responsible for the negligence. Yousaf Kamal, another relative of the deceased boy, said the body had deliberately not been loaded on the plane. He said Minister for Kashmir Affairs and Gilgit-Baltistan Engr Amir Muqam was scheduled to fly to Gilgit from Islamabad on Friday, adding that the PIA flight from Islamabad to Gilgit couldnt operate due to the bad weather condition. He said the federal minister had changed his plan and decided to go to Skardu and kept the passengers waiting. He said the flight was scheduled to depart from Islamabad at 9am, but was delayed till 1pm to accommodate the minister, leaving the body behind at the airport. Published in Dawn, May 11th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Downside risks for Pakistan remain exceptionally high: IMF
Description : Downside risks for the economy remain exceptionally high, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) said on Friday in its staff report ahead of the governments talks with the fund on a longer term progamme. An IMF mission is expected to visit the country this month to discuss a new programme, ahead of the government beginning its annual budget-making process for the next financial year. Downside risks remain exceptionally high. While the new government has indicated its intention to continue the SBAs (standby arrangement) policies, political uncertainty remains significant, said the fund in its staff report following the second and final review under the SBA.
The fund added that political complexities and high cost of living could weigh on policy, adding that policy slippages, together with lower external financing, could undermine the narrow path to debt sustainability and place pressure on the exchange rate. The IMF also said higher commodity prices and disruptions to shipping, or tighter global financial conditions, would also adversely affect external stability for the cash-strapped nation. The fund stressed the need for timely post-programme external financing disbursements.
Last month, the country completed a short-term $3 billion programme, which helped stave off sovereign default, but Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif has stressed the need for a fresh, longer term programme. Pakistan narrowly averted default last summer and the economy has stabilised after the completion of the last IMF programme with inflation coming down to around 17 per cent in April from a record high 38pc last May. The country is still dealing with a high fiscal shortfall and while the external account deficit has been controlled through import control mechanisms, it has come at the expense of stagnating growth, which is expected to be around 2pc this year compared to negative growth last year. Pakistan is expected to seek at least $6bn and request additional financing from the Fund under the Resilience and Sustainability Trust. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Who can rock the hybrid boat?
Description : A NUMBER of developments over the past week suggest that the establishment is keen to enforce/ maintain the status quo and the only impediment in its path may be an assertive superior judiciary that has been increasingly finding its feet in recent weeks. If jailed PTI leader and former prime minister Imran Khans article in UKs conservative right-wing Telegraph newspaper blaming the military leadership directly for all his woes the week before was not hint enough of the state of play, two public statements by the latter clarified issues rather unambiguously. The first came in the DG ISPRs press briefing, which was ostensibly called to discuss Afghanistan-based terrorist groups involvement in attacks on Chinese nationals working on development projects in the country. But in response to a couple of questions about the PTI and Imran Khan related to the events of May 9 last year, the DG ISPR stated unequivocally that the only path to rehabilitation for the political party and its leaders was to seek forgiveness for attacking your own forces.
Then, perhaps, talks could happen and that too with political parties (ie, the government), as the military had nothing to do with politics. Imran Khan has been consistent in saying he wouldnt talk to the powerless political parties and that a meaningful dialogue is possible only with the military. The DG ISPR also lamented the delay in the prosecution and sentencing of all those responsible for the May mayhem  including the leaders and mastermind against whom irrefutable evidence has been gathered and submitted  and, in doing so, appeared to hint at the establishments frustrations with what it perceives as roadblocks being erected by the judiciary. The content of the live presser evoked an equally adamant response from the PTI, which went on the offensive, reiterating its stance that May 9 was a false flag operation, accusing the militarys spokesman of being economical with the truth, and saying it would be happy to live with the findings of an impartial judicial commission into the May 9 events and would even apologise if found to be at fault. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. The military spokesman had pre-empted this demand in his briefing earlier by saying if a probe were to happen, as was being demanded, it ought to start with 2014, and not nine years later. The 2014 PTI sit-in in the federal capital was said to have been instigated and backed by the then ISI chief. This was the first indication that the military was prepared to hold its own accountable for past follies, if it paved the way for the trials and sentencing of PTI leaders it says were responsible for the attacks on defence installations in a number of cities in Punjab and KP. While the spokesman left nothing to the imagination, on the first anniversary of May 9, the army chief added his voice to his chief spokesmans in terms of stressing the need for punishing the perpetrators of the violence a year earlier, also lashing out against what he called digital terrorism.
This indicates that harsher curbs on social media are planned. So far, the PTI has had overwhelming social media dominance and had been able to keep a step ahead of its adversaries, but we will find out soon whether it has what it takes to bypass software the Chinese have developed over the years (and Pakistan has reportedly acquired) and successfully used to block dissident content. With this ever-widening gulf between the establishment and the party it once saw as a panacea for all that ails Pakistan, the one thing that many felt could force a rethink in the establishment would have been a public manifestation of the immense support enjoyed by the PTI, as evidenced in last Februarys elections. Many Pakistan watchers keenly waited all day for multitudes of PTI supporters to spill out onto the roads and streets of major urban conurbations on the party leaders call to break the shackles and protest on May 9. But the brutal crackdown of the past one year seems to have knocked the wind out of the partys sails and worn down the workers will. People may turn out to vote for it in droves, but did not appear prepared to risk life, limb and liberty in coming out for mass protests. Some small localised protests did happen, but had zero impact in the sense of influencing decision-making in the corridors of power. Going forward, a couple of factors will play a role in steering developments. The first and foremost will be the confidence the army chief has in his control over his institution. His predecessor appointed a dozen major generals to three stars in his final six weeks in office and left the incumbent little room in terms of forming his own team. Natural attrition and the more dramatic exit of a couple of three stars on disciplinary grounds recently has, 18 months down the line, given the chief an opportunity to place senior officers of his own choosing in key roles which will give him greater freedom of action both inside and outside the institution. The promotion of three officers this week, including the DG ISPR, to three stars was another step in that direction. The military saw May 9 as a coup against the chief, a failed attempt to dislodge him from office. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. With the PTI protests failing to gather momentum, the only impediment in his path seems to be an increasingly assertive superior judiciary. It can and will, in all likelihood, challenge the establishments pre-eminence in decision-making. It isnt clear how the latter plans to deal with that, especially because it believes that a direly needed economic revival is only possible under the umbrella of a hybrid set-up and in a relatively calm political environment. Only the judiciary can rock its boat now. The writer is a former editor of Dawn. abbas.nasir@hotmail.com Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Insurgency and social change
Description : THE recent killing of seven barbershop workers from Punjab in Gwadar is another indicator that the insurgency in Balochistan is evolving and intensifying demographic changes, which will impact the sociopolitical landscape of the province. Although targeted killings of settlers in Balochistan are not a new trend, the emergence of the Balochistan Liberation Army as the primary insurgent group has significantly increased operational capacities and diversified targets.
While the BLA has not officially claimed responsibility for the Gwadar attack, it is likely the act of one of its wings or affiliate groups. Last month, the group carried out a significant attack, killing nine people from central Punjab who were planning on reaching Europe through Iran. Based on their ethnicity, BLA gunmen abducted them from a bus bound for Taftan and later dumped their bodies under a bridge in a hilly area of Noshki. In a similar attack, possibly by the same gunmen, two people were killed when they tried to escape the assailants cordon on N-40, the Quetta-Noshki highway. Following the Noshki attack, the BLA issued a statement claiming that its special squad had killed agents of Pakistans intelligence agencies who, they claimed, were travelling in plain clothes on the bus. However, media reports and investigations later revealed that the victims were using the Balochistan route to travel to Iran and onward to Europe. Baloch militants view workers and travellers from Punjab as collaborators or agents of security forces or the federal government. Attacks targeting Punjabi workers and settlers have occurred in various parts of the province in the past. It appears that the insurgents kill settlers because they are non-combatants and, as such, easy targets. Militant groups assign such tasks to their new recruits to test their conviction and draw them into the cycle of violence. While one can comprehend Baloch grievances against the state institutions and Punjab, it is also crucial to understand why they target non-combatants who have been serving them for years. Whenever anger flares against the states flawed policies, settlers become the targets. Traditionally, Baloch society has a few key professions. Hairdressing is one of the major ones they miss. Teaching comes next, with teachers from Punjab and the Urdu-speaking community making significant contributions to the education sector in the province. Like tribal codes in other parts of the country, the Baloch follow the tradition of hosting members of different ethnicities without integrating them into their tribal ethics. This is a common practice, as assimilation is a long process. The same applies to settlers from Punjab and urban Sindh, who have embraced the norms of Baloch society, while maintaining ties with their native towns and communities.
However, Punjabis constitute the largest ethnic group in the country and wield significant power and resources, leading to resentment not only among the Baloch, but also Pakhtuns and Sindhis. Whenever anger flares against the establishment and the states flawed policies, settlers become the targets of this animosity. Historically, barbers have been the first victims when such hatred triggers violence. It is worth noting that many of these barbers hail from southern Punjab, much of which identifies itself as Baloch, but their official domicile determines their identity and ethnicity. Over the last two decades, Pakhtuns have captured market businesses in urban Balochistan, while Sindhis have gradually become prominent in the labour market. Despite issues of ethnic and tribal pride and sociocultural differences, there has been no hostility towards these communities. This is because both ethnicities are part of Balochistan and share some cultural commonalities. Moreover, both communities have faced major hostility, apart from minor issues related to ethnic and tribal pride and sociocultural differences. The reasons are that both ethnicities are part of Balochistan and share few other cultural commonalities, but both are also seen as deprived communities and, in the past, have remained part of the political struggle for rights. Insurgencies have no room for neutrality or ambiguity, as insurgents seek clear distinctions between friends and foes. In places like Myanmar and India, ethnic insurgents target civilians from minority ethnic groups, as well as engage in property destruction and other abuses. While small ethnic groups may strive to maintain a neutral stance, they often find themselves between insurgents and counterinsurgents in grey areas. This dynamic is evident among Pakhtuns and Sindhis, who have been targeted by insurgents while working on government projects. The contractors had hired them as an alternative to Punjabi labour, but they were not spared despite a sense of affinity with them.
Sociopolitical transformation is a complex phenomenon, which is influenced not only by insurgents but also by internal societal changes. Baloch society is transforming due to rural-to-urban migration, increasing literacy rates, and improved connectivity. Similar to Karachis experience, urbanisation in Quetta is making other major urban centres multi-ethnic too. Despite ethnic bonds with Sindhis, coexistence with Pakhtuns and Sindhis may face occasional challenges. Additionally, religion presents a growing challenge, as religious fervour increases alongside literacy rates among the Baloch. While this may appear advantageous for state institutions seeking cohesion through religion, religiosity has not weakened Balochistans nationalistic sentiments. The promotion of religious organisations and madressahs by state institutions has failed to make a significant impact, mainly due to the vast disparities within Baloch societys tribal, rural, and urban composition, which foster diverse political interests. The very forces undermining peace are now major power players. At the national level, the provinces poor human development and governance indicators leave ample space for resistance politics. Sociopolitical changes often trigger paradoxical sentiments, with simultaneous pro-development and anti-development attitudes emerging. When the sense of deprivation intensifies, and resource distribution becomes contentious, it creates a conducive environment for militants to recruit, expand, and diversify their targets and tactics. Targeting non-combatants of the majority group reflects a deepening societal anger at this level. This is the most crucial level, as the state has to rethink and correct its approach towards Balochistan. The writer is a security analyst. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : A turbulent 2023
Description : PAKISTAN faced a tumultuous year in 2023 marked by severe economic distress and a sharp erosion of civil liberties. As documented in the HRCPs annual report, the year was nothing short of a human rights crisis on multiple fronts. Economic hardship was pervasive, with back-breaking inflation  nearly 40pc  and low growth hitting the common citizen the hardest. Protests were widespread, ranging from government employees striking against delayed salaries and pension issues to political demonstrations demanding timely elections. The state responded with indifference and sometimes outright violence, underlining its disregard for the peoples constitutional rights. The political arena was no less strained: the year saw unprecedented violence following the arrest of former prime minister Imran Khan; subsequent PTI-led riots were met with harsh government crackdowns. This included mass arrests and the controversial use of military courts for civilian trials. Political dissent was stifled and freedom of speech curtailed with internet shutdowns and media gags on reporting of certain political leaders. Sadly, the governments management of the turmoil involved significant overreach, impacting judicial independence and skewing the electoral landscape. The swift passage of laws granting sweeping powers to intelligence agencies and restricting media freedoms points to the governments alarming propensity to consolidate power at the cost of transparency and accountability.
Human rights violations were not limited to political suppression. The report highlights severe abuses such as enforced disappearances, alleged extrajudicial killings and custodial torture by state agencies. The societal impact of these policies and actions has been devastating. Moreover, marginalised communities, including women, children, religious minorities, and transgender persons, faced increased violence and discrimination. Notable too was the harsh crackdown on peaceful assemblies like the Baloch Yakjehti Councils protests. On the international front, despite engaging with global human rights mechanisms, Pakistans selective adherence to recommendations concerning enforced disappearances and the use of the death penalty reflected a reluctance to fully align with international human rights standards. Rulers would do well to remember that adhering to those standards will help maintain Pakistans desperately needed GSP-Plus status and be a more inviting place for foreign investment.
As the year proceeds, it is imperative for the state to reconsider its approach to human rights. The government must ensure the independence of the judiciary, respect for democratic processes, and protection for all citizens against the abuse of power. Laws that infringe on freedom of expression and assembly should be reviewed and reformed. Additionally, there should be a concerted effort to address the economic inequalities that underpin much of the social unrest. For a stable and prosperous Pakistan, human rights must be more than an ideal; they must be an integral part of governance and everyday life. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : The lethal troika
Description : MANY factors were responsible for the defeat of the erstwhile Soviet Union and then the US in Afghanistan. A common factor was the existence of a combination of extremely resilient militant groups resisting both superpowers. This combination consisted of three categories of militants: local Afghan militants resisting foreign invaders; Pakistani militants crossing over to help their Afghan brethren; and thousands of mujahideen from various countries, particularly in the Middle East, participating in the Afghan jihad. With some variations in their composition, role and external supporters, they fought together against the US and USSR for 30 years, forcing them to withdraw. Alarmingly, after the US withdrawal from Afghanistan in 2021, this Afghanistan-based lethal troika now targets Pakistan. The situation necessitates a fundamental shift in the terrorist threat assessment in Pakistan  from focusing exclusively on the Tehreek-i-Taliban Pakistan to broadening the threat calculus to the troika of the TTP, Afghan Taliban, and Al Qaeda. Concerning the nexus between the Taliban and TTP, the latest UN report on Afghanistan states that the Afghan government was supplying weapons, training facilities and regular financial packages to the TTP. Al Qaedas primary goal, after lying low in the region for many years, is to revive itself without annoying its Afghan hosts or attracting the Wests adverse attention. In view of this, it seems to have opted to carry out its activities in Pakistan through the TTP, while staying below the international radar. The importance Al Qaeda gives to the TTP is evident in that it selected 15 of its commanders to assist the group conduct terrorist attacks in Pakistan. It also supplied armed fighters to the TTP in its attack in Chitral in September 2023, which killed four security officials. Al Qaedas camp in Kunar, headed by Hakim ul Masri, is responsible for training suicide bombers for the TTP. The TTP, which has been the most lethal terrorist group in Pakistan over the last three years, is on the same page with the Taliban and Al Qaeda not only because of an ideological affinity and a shared history of fighting foreign invaders in Afghanistan, but also due to similar goals of Sharia enforcement in Pakistan. The TTP intends to replicate in Pakistan what the Taliban did in Afghanistan. There were reports of the TTP helping the other two members of the troika by killing Taliban members defecting to the rival Islamic State-Khorasan Province in Afghanistan. The basic point is that while the troika is united on targeting Pakistan, the members play different roles. The Taliban are likely to help TTP discreetly in Afghanistan by providing sanctuary, with Al Qaeda supporting both openly in Afghanistan through mentoring and in Pakistan through its sympathisers. With its edge, the TTP is likely to carry out ground attacks in Pakistan and lead a campaign to build up its narrative of violent extremism. As far as the strategy and tactics to be adopted by the troika go, the TTP intends to replicate in Pakistan what the Taliban did in Afghanistan. In a recent interview to Khorasan Diary, TTP ameer Noor Wali Mehsud stated, our jihad in Pakistan  has entered a decisive phase. He went on to say ominously: Pakistani security agencies have unjustly occupied our homeland and our goal is to liberate our homeland and implement the divine law. In a nutshell, the TTP seems to be falling back on the two-point narrative of resistance in Afghanistan, ie, liberation of homeland and enforcement of divine laws. This brings us to the likely impact of the troika on the terrorist threat landscape in Pakistan. Since 2021, the number of terrorist attacks in Pakistan has been consistently increasing every year. This is likely to continue in 2024, with three possible changes. One, the number of Afghan nationals taking part in terrorist attacks in Pakistan may increase  we recall here the suicide bombing against military personnel in 2023 in Bannu by Afghans. Two, given its penchant for high-profile attacks, Al Qaeda may train the TTP to carry out such attacks. Three, given that the top Al Qaeda and Taliban instructors will train TTP members, the quality and sophistication of the attacks in 2024 are likely to be enhanced. Another area likely to be impacted by the troika is infiltration. Earlier, in the 1990s, Al Qaeda infiltrated educational institutions such as Karachi and Punjab universities to recruit educated youth. These recruitment cells in universities may be reactivated. Also, to stay abreast of latest government planning in counterterrorism, the TTP, like the Taliban did in Afghanistan, may attempt to infiltrate government departments, including intel agencies. The third and most important dimension of infiltration is that of the military, which was carried out by Al Qaeda in Pakistan in the late 1990s. It may be pertinent to mention that the last attempted terrorist attack by Al Qaeda was in 2014 in Karachi, when a group of naval officers tried to hijack a navy frigate and crash into a US ship in the open seas. Al Qaeda worked somewhat openly in Pakistan from the 1980s to 2001, and built up an elaborate network of civilian volunteers in many cities of Pakistan, who assisted in collecting funds, recruiting volunteers, and providing hideouts for the group. These sleeper cells might again be contacted by it and reactivated. Similarly, there were some Pakistani militant organisations of the 1980s, like the Harkatul Mujahideen, Lashkar-e-Taiba, etc, sympathetic to Al Qaeda and lying low these days. Al Qaeda may re-establish contact with them and get their support for the TTP. Finally, both the Taliban and Al Qaeda are known for their high-quality propaganda campaign. The TTP media wing lacks that finesse. In the light of guidance from the Taliban and Al Qaeda, we are likely to witness a significant improvement in the quality of propaganda. As Sun Tsu stated, if you know your enemy and you know yourself, you need not fear the result of a hundred battles. Sadly, it seems that Pakistan is erring in assessing the collective capabilities of the TTP, supported by the Taliban and Al Qaeda. The writer is a former police officer who was Nactas first national coordinator. Published in Dawn, May 11th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : The net metering dead end
Description : LETS start with putting a couple of undue misapprehensions to rest. I have had the opportunity of interacting with key decision-makers in the power bureaucracy and they assure me of two things. First, solar panels installed in peoples homes are not going to be taxed. Second, the net metering rate at which power utilities buy electricity back from consumers is not going to be revised downward for those who already have their system up and running. They emphasise that changes are being considered in the net metering regulations of 2015, with a view to reducing the amount people receive for the power their systems pump into the grid, but that those with existing systems will not be impacted. Lets hope they will keep their word, because breaking covenants is becoming far too routine for the government of Pakistan. Assuming that they will keep their word with existing customers, there is another problem of a more general but critical nature. The government of Pakistan seems to no longer be able to afford the solar revolution sweeping across the world. This is somewhat striking, since the whole idea of the renewable revolution is to make electricity more affordable and cleaner and many countries have set targets for themselves on how much of their power should come from renewable sources like solar. For example, in 2010, the worlds total installed solar power generation capacity was less than 42GW, according to Our World in Data. By 2022, this had risen to 1,053GW. This is one of the fastest rates of growth for a new power source. What is even more striking than these two data points is the slope of the graph along the way, which shows continuous acceleration year after year. Rooftop solar has dominated this growth, although some estimates are suggesting that utility-scale solar may start to overtake rooftop in a few years in some critical regions, like the European Union. But these trends apart, rooftop solar has dominated the rise, and for most countries, it has been the main driving force in their solar expansion and plans to meet net zero targets. Power bureaucracies need to adapt to, facilitate and spur on the solar revolution. Here in Pakistan, something has happened that others have experienced too, but they found innovative solutions rather than trying to suppress the growth of rooftop solar. Pakistan had targeted 1,920MW of rooftop solar capacity by the year 2026, according to its latest Indicative Generation Capacity Expansion Plan. In reality, we crossed that threshold in 2023, if not sooner. Now they want to apply the brakes, because, according to the power bureaucracy, this rapid growth in rooftop solar is creating costs that have to be passed on to poorer segments of the population, who dont have the luxury (yet) to go the rooftop solar route because they have single-phase meters and the technology does not yet work with that. Additionally, they have very limited rooftop space they can use for the purpose. The big problem in Pakistans power bureaucracy now is that the state insists on setting the price of electricity manually, using outmoded formulae. In large-scale thermal power plants, for example, they still use what is called cost plus pricing, where the regulator actually looks at each cost item in the prospective power plant and decides what their total costs are and how much margin they should be allowed. This is partly because nobody is willing to invest in Pakistan on a large scale if their returns are not guaranteed. And the big reason for that is the government of Pakistan has a lousy reputation when it comes to delivering on its commitments. Meanwhile, the way in which electricity is produced has evolved and changed rapidly from the time this cost plus pricing formula was developed. Back then, we had a few large-scale power plants supply electricity to a single buyer  the government  which transmitted this power to various distribution companies, all state owned, who then sold it on to a list of metered customers. The solar revolution has changed all that. Now we have what is called distributed generation or point of sale consumption, where electricity is produced in a large and growing number of locations, and often consumed then and there. Along with this shift has come a new category of consumers and producers of electricity, called prosumers  people who produce and consume electricity themselves. The old pricing formulae are not going to work in a world of prosumers. Here is what seems to be going wrong in the power bureaucracy with this move to bring down net metering rates, and perhaps switch to what they call gross metering for all categories, although it seems the details are still being worked out. Whats wrong with all this is that it aims to protect the bureaucracy from the disruptive impact of a new technology that is spreading rapidly around the world, and changing how power sectors are organised. Imagine, in the early 2000s, if the bureaucracy had moved to protect the Pakistan Telecommunication Corporation from the disruptive impact of mobile phones. Imagine if they made the argument that this new technology was being used by elites, who were opting out of the PTC system, leaving the rest to carry the costs of the state-owned telecom infrastructure. Imagine if the state gave in to their arguments, and moved to heavily tax handsets and talk time and priced the new technology out of the market. Where would we be today? Something similar, perhaps not identical, is happening today with solar and other renewable power generation technology. Power bureaucracies need to adapt to, facilitate and spur on this revolution and increase the speed of its adoption. The key change begins with pricing and then the single buyer model, allowing power generators to sell to their customers directly instead of through the state. Instead, they seem more concerned with protecting the financial health of their bureaucracy in the face of this revolution. The writer is a business and economy journalist. khurram.husain@gmail.com X: @khurramhusain Published in Dawn, May 9th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : No such thing as strategic state-owned enterprises, says Finance Minister Aurangzeb
Description : Finance Minister Muhammad Aurangzeb on Sunday said that there was no such thing as strategic state-owned enterprises (SOEs) as he stressed the need for privatisation. He made the remarks at a pre-budget conference in Lahore, two days after  Deputy Prime Minister Ishaq Dar said the government would limit its business only to strategic and essential SOEs under its domain but their number would be reduced from 40 after scrutiny. Chairing the Cabinet Committee on Privatisation (CCoP) meeting, which was attended by the finance minister, Dar said privatisation of loss-making SOEs would be a priority. The meeting noted that 40 SOEs were currently categorised as strategic or essential, but respective ministries would submit their details to the Cabinet Committee on State-Owned Enterprises (CCoSOE). The CCoSOE will determine the status of the SOEs to be categorised as strategic or essential entities. Speaking on Sunday, Aurangzeb said: There is no such as [a] strategic SOE. Talking about the meeting chaired by Dar on Friday, he continued, We are absolutely on the same wavelength  that there is no such thing as a strategic SOE. The finance minister said that a meeting would be held tomorrow where we will go back to various ministries and say that all this should be handed over to the private sector. There will be public-private partnership and we will accelerate the privatisation agenda, he said. Commenting on concerns regarding the privatisation of Pakistan International Airlines (PIA), Aurangzeb said the government was not just looking at foreign investors. They are local and foreign investors who are bidding [] there is no such thing that we are only looking at foreign investors, he said. Commenting on a fresh loan programme with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) programme, he said that a larger and longer programme was needed to bring permanence in macroeconomic stability and structural reforms. He also talked about energy reforms, saying that there were leakages and stressed the need for stopping theft. He said that changes were being brought to the boards of distribution companies (Discos) in order to bring in those from the private sector for better corporate governance. And then you will see how we bring those Discos towards concessions or privatisation or a combination of both, he emphasised. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Fight till the last ball, PCB chief tells cricket team in Dublin
Description : Pakistan Cricket Board (PCB) Chairman Mohsin Naqvi on Sunday told the national team to fight till the last ball ahead of the second match of a three-match T20 series against Ireland. As he met players of the mens national team in the Irish capital of Dublin, the PCB quoted him as saying: Fight till the last ball; the competition should be apparent.
On Friday, Ireland recorded their maiden T20 win against Pakistan who could not defend a solid-looking 182-5 after being put in to bat first, dealing a shocking blow to the Babar Azam-led sides preparations for the World Cup, which is taking place next month in the United States. The loss to Ireland, who are in Pakistans group in the T20 World Cup, came after a series draw on home soil to a New Zealand squad missing most of their first-choice players. With Babar only recently reinstated as captain, it was another bump in the road for their tournament preparation.
Todays match will start at 7pm, with Ireland leading the series by 1-0. In a post on X, the PCB shared a video of Naqvi meeting the Green Shirts and speaking to them, adding that a detailed discussion on the action plan took place during the two-hour-long meetup. Encouraging the team, the PCB chairman urged the players to play with hard work, passion and a professional approach. He noted that T20 cricket needed a unique and aggressive approach, adding that victory was only possible if cricket was played in a modern manner. An action plan can be formulated while sitting in a room but the real test is on the ground, where the performance should be visible, the PCB quoted him as telling the team. Naqvi praised all players as undoubtedly talented, professional and the best, adding that the teams bowling attack was splendid. However, he emphasised that great attention was required when fielding so that the opponent cannot get any chance to score. The players are the hope for Pakistan and you have to meet the nations expectations. Teamwork is the fundamental thing for victory, the PCB chairman said. He noted that the public loved cricket and had expectations from the team. Naqvi said that success would come if all 11 of the players in the team performed with unity. No one is accepting the loss in the first match against Ireland. The real test after Ireland and England is the World Cup, he added. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Canada arrests fourth Indian national in killing of Sikh activist
Description : A fourth Indian national was charged by Canadian authorities on Saturday in the 2023 killing of a separatist Sikh leader in Vancouver. Amandeep Singh, 22, was already being held for unrelated gun charges before being charged with first-degree murder and conspiracy to commit murder in the slaying of Hardeep Singh Nijjar. Three other Indian nationals were arrested this month. The killing sparked a diplomatic row between Ottawa and New Delhi when Prime Minister Justin Trudeau linked Indian intelligence to the killing. Nijjar  who immigrated to Canada in 1997 and became a citizen in 2015  had advocated for a separate Sikh state, known as Khalistan, carved out of India. He had been wanted by Indian authorities for alleged terrorism and conspiracy to commit murder  allegations he denied. He was shot dead on June 18, 2023, by masked assailants in the parking lot of the Sikh temple he led in suburban Vancouver. Trudeau announced several months later that Canada had credible allegations connecting Indian intelligence to the slaying. India dismissed the allegations as absurd and responded furiously, briefly curbing visas for Canadians and forcing Ottawa to withdraw diplomats. In November, the US Justice Department charged an Indian citizen living in the Czech Republic with allegedly plotting a similar assassination attempt on American soil. Prosecutors said in unsealed court documents that an Indian government official was also involved in the planning. The shock allegations came after US President Joe Biden hosted Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi for a rare state visit, as Washington seeks closer ties with India against Chinas growing influence. US intelligence agencies have assessed that the plot on American soil was approved by Indias top spy official at the time, Samant Goel, the Washington Post reported in April. Canada is home to some 770,000 Sikhs, who make up about two per cent of the countrys population, with a vocal minority calling for an independent state of Khalistan. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : ESSAY: WERE READY FOR YOUR CLOSE-UP NOW
Description : JUNE 13, 2014 I am excited to be here, thrilled to have the opportunity to audition. Despite being on the verge of throwing up, I walk into the audition room assertively. The male and female casting directors size me up. They study the way I carry myself. They ascertain my charisma, assess my brand potential and evaluate my attractiveness. I am conscious of all of it and yet, I allow them to continue doing it.  I am a willing participant in this game, voluntarily choosing to subject myself to constant rejections. Perhaps all artists have masochistic tendencies and perhaps these are mine. The casting directors thank me for coming in and I thank them for their time. I notice that I am trembling as I grab my bag from the floor. Before I have even stepped out of the room, the whisperings have begun.    As I stumble out into the waiting room, the other actresses peer closely at me, attempting to decipher whether I blew it or bagged the role. I remain stoic and they hastily return to rehearsing their monologues. We are all clones of one another. We hold out hope, waiting for that singular break, which will catapult our lives into a growing trajectory. Diary entries from a former actor reflect on how the desire to conform to the norms of the entertainment industry allowed her to lose her own sense of self and how words helped her rediscover it  The room reeks of desperation and throbs with want. I walk out.    Upon returning home, I tactfully avoid my mother, who will undoubtedly want to know how the audition went. I loiter aimlessly in the kitchen, before finally grabbing a glass of water and heading to my bedroom.  I feel restless and out of control. I need to reaffirm my beauty. I pick up my phone and select a desirable photo of myself from my camera roll. In it, Im half-smiling, caught in the golden hour.  I post it to my Instagram and, within a couple of hours, 192 people like it. The comments roll in slowly: stunning!!, OMG, so beautiful. Im moderately satisfied.  I move over to my Instagram mailbox and scroll through a handful of DMs from random men. This, in a way, also reaffirms my beauty. Im living in the male gaze and I no longer mind it. Ive done good. JULY 15, 2015 Across my teenage years, I work sporadically as an actress in Karachi. I scour Facebook pages of production houses and advertising agencies and bookmark audition callouts. I, then, eagerly drive to audition at rented bungalows in Defence and Sea View.  I carefully curate bits of work in commercials, short films and plays  the only mediums where I am provided a larger margin to experiment as a female performer in Pakistan. I am cast as the feminist, middle-aged woman whose husband is cheating on her in a contemporary play or as the galvanising, empowered 20-something Pakistani woman in a commercial. I stare into cameras, grim and unsmiling. I find comfortable homes on stage and sets. I revel in the camaraderie of grown-up adults playing make-believe. I dont mind the long hours or the protracted time it takes for the shots to be lit up  this is all worth the wait. The stage, for me, has become a safe space to be vulnerable, without judgement. In a way, it is a refuge from the hardening of the soul that comes with growing up as a woman in this world. Though I am pleased with my work, a part of me remains discontent. There is a scarcity of roles in Pakistan. Playing the traumatised daughter-in-law or the scorned woman are unappealing options. In auditions, I am still patronised by casting directors, who tell me to be less angry. Yet, I play along. I be what they need. I wear make-up, albeit horrendously. I try to appear striking.  And then, I am mortified when I am not given a callback. My parents are nonplussed. They cannot fathom why their academically gifted daughter prefers a profession where she is commodified and where her youth is a currency. They cannot understand why I have promised loyalty to a media machine that still operates on patriarchal benchmarks of beauty. Unsurprisingly, by my early adulthood, I fail to carve out my own identity. I forfeit my voice. I become an extension of something else and nothing more. FEBRUARY 25, 2017 There are specific moments on set when I am hyper-aware of my gender. I spend hours suspended from reality, with a cast and crew who are strangers I am introduced to just a few hours earlier.  We all attempt to foster greater intimacy for a worthier creative breakthrough  this is within the acting job description, after all. But there are times when this faux closeness is exploited by those with far greater clout than me and, in those moments, the onus of protecting myself falls on me alone. So, I grudgingly laugh along to misogynistic jokes. I do my best not to appear over-friendly. I refuse to prolong conversations beyond work on WhatsApp with casting agents. And after shows, I head straight home, avoiding the spaces where things get murky. Because, who will believe me?  Historically in Pakistan, women simply become a centre of speculation upon whom moral investigations are conducted. Society and viewers will ultimately turn the blame on me  I chose to be a pawn in this industry. I, a Pakistani-Muslim woman, have entered this vulgarity out of my own volition. I do what other women do. I silence myself. I relive traumas. There is no Human Resource team, there are no harassment policies read out on the first day of production, and there is no power I hold. Everything simply goes.  AUGUST 12, 2018 Its August and Im cast in a commercial, which releases on Pakistans Independence Day. Ironically, the theme of this commercial is women empowerment. Ironic because, as I sit in my makeup chair, artists arrive to accentuate my features, cover up my blemishes and contour my nose. Intermittently, they drop in beauty tips on how to tame my hair and encourage me to acquire better make-up. I nod politely, as if Ill actually consider their advice, but all I feel internally is dejected. For years, I had assumed that my mind, my imagination and my education were worthy devices. But in actuality, I had greatly underestimated how much of the world ran on beauty. I slump forward in my chair and think about how I have given so much of myself to a profession where I am a throwaway, simply replaceable by the next pretty young thing who walks through those doors. SEPTEMBER 20, 2018 Ive decided to take a break from acting. Its been five years of endless auditions and unremitting rejections. Of course, discounting the notion that my self-esteem has plummeted to irredeemable depths, the decision also makes sense  Im leaving Pakistan for the first time, to complete my undergraduate degree abroad. In England, I periodically dabble in theatre to satisfy my acting itch. I perform in consequential plays like The Vagina Monologues. I deliver dramatic readings of passages from exiled authors in dimly lit studios. But even here, as a brown-Muslim woman, the roles I am given are scant. The leads are reserved for white people, whilst other ethnicities are relegated to the supporting roles. Here, I face other hitches  I am seen as either too dark or not dark enough. I am either a religious creature or an outlandish woman from an exotic land. I am still seen from a white persons perspective. MARCH 27, 2020 The world has stopped turning on its wheels. A global pandemic rages across the globe and humanity has been ordered to stay home. I scramble to return to Pakistan and spend the next few weeks doing what everyone else is doing  baking, scrolling through social media and bingeing on television shows.  But, after a while, the days mesh into one and I am forced to sit with myself for the first time in my life. I reflect and ponder over the last couple of years, which led to me becoming the woman I am today. One restless night, I pick up my laptop in search of an avenue for creative expression. I open up a blank MS Word document and begin to write. And after 22 years of silencing my voice, the words gush out of me, like a broken faucet which wont turn off. These words had seemingly lived within me, waiting with bated breath, soundlessly patient. So, I write. I write about the experiences I never had. I write stories in which I garbage social norms and where women are flawed individuals. I write stories about the spaces I wish to inhabit. I write about the women who inhabit my real life  women who fire after their yearnings without the fear of retribution. Slowly, I begin sending out my tales into the world, hoping my lived experiences may relate to someone. I face the familiar call of rejection but, ultimately, the year of the pandemic becomes the year of writing.  Through those long months of staying at home, I use my words to reckon with the trauma of my past and the horrifying moments I allowed myself to go through. With reclaiming my narrative, I feel cathartic. By writing about the pain, I have not let it best me. I am finally the protagonist of my own story. As I write, I relearn everything I have been taught. I purge all the venomous psychology, instilled in me as a young girl. I begin to closely understand my womanhood. In my essays and stories, my beauty and physicality are no longer determining factors in my worthiness. My mind is my weapon and, unlike my beauty, it doesnt have an expiration date. OCTOBER 30, 2021 My heart feels irritated. Today, I have nothing to write on my computer. My fingers flick over to the old, bookmarked link of my acting portfolio. As the website loads, my heart starts pounding.  The pictures appear one at a time. I scroll down and see old headshots and performance screen grabs. I am 17, 19, and 20. I am smiling, poised, concealing the hurt. I am being what they need me to be  their thoughts, opinions and desires. I inhale shortly and close my laptop. I am remorseful that I couldnt protect that little girl. That girl who fell in love with the stage. The girl who learnt how to finesse technique, to hit the mark consistently, to access unknowing depths within her. But writing about that girl and restructuring her narrative, I have a greater agency over my past and present. I have allowed myself to gain autonomy through creative expression. These words have saved my life. Neha Maqsood is a writer and poet.
Her work can be read at nehamaqsood.com Published in Dawn, EOS, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Echoes of love
Description : Ever wonder why some guys are just great with everyone? It all starts at home! Exactly, mothers and sons share a powerful bond that goes a very long way in shaping the kind of men they become.  It is a special connection like no other! This bond helps shape who a boy grows up to be. A mothers love and guidance show her son how to be caring and understanding, which helps him build strong relationships throughout his life. A mother becomes a living example of respect and kindness in his life. The way she interacts with everyone, but particularly the men in her life, sets the standard for his sons behaviour with all the women young or old in his life. By expecting courtesy and consideration, she subtly teaches him that women deserve the same treatment  not as something special, but as fellow human beings.  While some mothers show their love with lots of hugs and kisses, that wasnt exactly my mums style. She was more on the strict and disciplined side, therefore, expressing her feelings with words wasnt always easy for her. However, I never doubted her love. It shone in her eyes  I was her pride and joy. Unlike my dad, mum took charge of making sure things ran smoothly and she was the one who enforced the rules. From a young age, she made sure I knew what was expected of me, both at home and out in the world. Her goal was clear: to raise me into a disciplined, respectful young man who protected others, especially girls in the family and those around me, she made me the one who could go out in the world with kindness and empathy in his heart.  However, as time passed, I realised that the rules set by my mother were never illogical or impulsive. They showed how much she cared about me and wanted me to be a strong, capable, responsible and disciplined person. Even though I didnt like when she suddenly showed her strictness to me, I realise now, it was her way of making me better and stronger for the future. We definitely had our moments, but all those rules and lectures from mum were totally worth it! They made me who I am, and Im happy with that!  There is no doubt that while growing up, most of us, boys and girls, hung out with our mother more than Dad (especially if she happens to be a stay-at-home one). This builds a stronger bond, dont you think so? Like, you come home from school and whos there asking a million questions about your day? Your mother, of course! Plus, shes always dropping wisdom bombs on you, casually, at dinner, or while youre helping out in the kitchen that very few of us could understand.  And as far as I can remember, those wisdom bombs were mostly about respect  respect for myself, respect for others and, most importantly, respect for women. She instilled in me gender equality and the inherent worth of every human being, regardless of their gender. There is no doubt that my father was there to show me the world from a male perspective, but my mother showed me the tenderness and the emotional depth of everything that I missed or failed to notice as a male. While my father taught me strength and resilience, my mother added lessons about emotional expression and the ability to connect with others on a human level.  Thanks to her, Im not just a walking brick wall  I can understand others and express my emotions, too!   Boys may not always express their sensitivity or emotions openly; they tend to keep them bottled up inside. Despite being hurt or upset; they often feel pressure not to show it because of societal expectations about masculinity. I consider myself fortunate because my mother understood this. She recognised the turmoil I was experiencing inside, the faade I tried to keep as I grew up.  I remember back in my childhood days, one day I came home from school feeling upset because a classmate had teased me during recess. My face was all red in anger, I ran straight to my mum. Instead of immediately solving the problem, she let me express my feelings fully. Once I had calmed down, she said, I know it hurts when someone is unkind, but your reaction shows you have a tender heart. That tenderness allows you to understand how others feel.  She gently wiped my tears and continued, Dont let anyone make you feel bad about having empathy. Its a gift that will help you form deep connections in life. My mother taught me that tenderness and emotional depth are strengths, not weaknesses. From her, I learned to appreciate my ability to feel deeply instead of suppressing it. It also helped me become more emotionally aware and in tune with myself and my other siblings. Now that I am an adult, I carry the legacy of my mothers teachings like a precious torch, lighting up my path wherever I go. Many kids and youngsters dont like when their parents give them instructions or tell them to follow the rules, but I accepted and followed. Whether it was making my bed every morning or completing my homework before playtime, my mothers insistence on discipline taught me responsibility and time management. Yes, undoubtedly, there were also times when I grumbled and protested, but all grown up now, I realise that those small tasks laid the foundation for success in all areas of my life. My mother is not in my life anymore, and I long to feel the comfort of her touch one more time. I long to hear her words of encouragement and wisdom once more. But you can express and cherish the presence of your parents in your life. Waste no minute, because we are the joy of our parents. Knowing that we care about them gives them strength and happiness. Therefore, even as adults, its crucial to express our love and care for our parents. Both mother and father hold a special place in our lives. They need to be acknowledged and appreciated.  I admit, as kids, teens and even adults, we can be selfish, often prioritising our desires without considering our parents feelings. There are occasions when we may prioritise our father, but we tend to take our mother for granted. Why? Because we believe she will never mind, always forgive and easily forget. Isnt it an injustice? Remember kids, our mother is the one who knows us from the core of our hearts, our good and bad, our strengths and weaknesses, because she was the one who gave us birth. She held us carefully and gently in her arms, remained up all night to comfort us when we cried for hours, and her tired, restless body with pure love kept trying to soothe and give us comfort forgetting all about her in providing us.  Dear mother, sometimes I wish I could rewind life. Theres so much Id tell you. First and foremost, how much your love means to me. You were my guide, teaching me right from wrong, even when it meant sacrificing your own comfort. All those late nights, all the things you gave up  they built the foundation of who I am today. And for that, I cant thank you enough. Theres a part of me that aches knowing I never truly expressed how grateful I was for your endless prayers, and whispered wishes for my happiness that echoed through the years. Because of you, mother, a part of me will always believe I can achieve anything. Thanks for whispering that into my heart all through the years.  Published in Dawn, Young World, May 11th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : No such thing as strategic state-owned enterprises, says Finance Minister Aurangzeb
Description : Finance Minister Muhammad Aurangzeb on Sunday said that there was no such thing as strategic state-owned enterprises (SOEs) as he stressed the need for privatisation. He made the remarks at a pre-budget conference in Lahore, two days after  Deputy Prime Minister Ishaq Dar said the government would limit its business only to strategic and essential SOEs under its domain but their number would be reduced from 40 after scrutiny. Chairing the Cabinet Committee on Privatisation (CCoP) meeting, which was attended by the finance minister, Dar said privatisation of loss-making SOEs would be a priority. The meeting noted that 40 SOEs were currently categorised as strategic or essential, but respective ministries would submit their details to the Cabinet Committee on State-Owned Enterprises (CCoSOE). The CCoSOE will determine the status of the SOEs to be categorised as strategic or essential entities. Speaking on Sunday, Aurangzeb said: There is no such as [a] strategic SOE. Talking about the meeting chaired by Dar on Friday, he continued, We are absolutely on the same wavelength  that there is no such thing as a strategic SOE. The finance minister said that a meeting would be held tomorrow where we will go back to various ministries and say that all this should be handed over to the private sector. There will be public-private partnership and we will accelerate the privatisation agenda, he said. Commenting on concerns regarding the privatisation of Pakistan International Airlines (PIA), Aurangzeb said the government was not just looking at foreign investors. They are local and foreign investors who are bidding [] there is no such thing that we are only looking at foreign investors, he said. Commenting on a fresh loan programme with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) programme, he said that a larger and longer programme was needed to bring permanence in macroeconomic stability and structural reforms. He also talked about energy reforms, saying that there were leakages and stressed the need for stopping theft. He said that changes were being brought to the boards of distribution companies (Discos) in order to bring in those from the private sector for better corporate governance. And then you will see how we bring those Discos towards concessions or privatisation or a combination of both, he emphasised. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : IMF mission to meet Pakistani authorities next week to discuss next phase of engagement: official
Description : An International Monetary Fund (IMF) mission will meet Pakistani authorities next week to discuss the next phase of engagement, an official from the international money lender said on Sunday. Speaking to Dawn.com, Esther Perez Ruiz, the Funds resident representative for Pakistan, said: A mission team led by Nathan Porter, IMFs mission chief to Pakistan, will meet with authorities next week to discuss the next phase of engagement. The aim is to lay the foundation for better governance and stronger, more inclusive, and resilient economic growth that will benefit all Pakistanis, she added. Pakistan last month completed a short-term $3 billion programme, which helped stave off sovereign default, but the government has stressed the need for a fresh, longer-term programme. Last week, the Fund said that a mission was expected to visit Pakistan this month to discuss the FY25 budget, policies, and reforms under a potential new programme for the welfare of all Pakistanis. Pakistan narrowly averted default last summer, and the $350bn economy has stabilised after the completion of the last IMF programme, with inflation coming down to around 17 per cent in April from a record high 38pc last May. The country is still dealing with a high fiscal shortfall and while the external account deficit has been controlled through import control mechanisms, it has come at the expense of stagnating growth, which is expected to be around 2pc this year compared to negative growth last year. Pakistan is expected to seek at least $6bn and request additional financing from the Fund under the Resilience and Sustainability Trust. On Friday, the Fund said that downside risks for the economy remain exceptionally high. Downside risks remain exceptionally high. While the new government has indicated its intention to continue the SBAs (standby arrangement) policies, political uncertainty remains significant, said the IMF in its staff report following the second and final review under the standby agreement. The Fund added that political complexities and high cost of living could weigh on policy, adding that policy slippages, together with lower external financing, could undermine the narrow path to debt sustainability and place pressure on the exchange rate. The IMF also said higher commodity prices and disruptions to shipping, or tighter global financial conditions, would also adversely affect external stability for the cash-strapped nation. The fund stressed the need for timely post-programme external financing disbursements. Additional input from Reuters Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Situation in AJK calms down after 2 days of violent clashes
Description : Following violent clashes over the last 48 hours, which left a policeman dead, the situation in Muzaffarabad seemed to have calmed down on Sunday, with a Rangers detachment that was sent to Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK) from Kohala having been withdrawn. AJK witnessed violent clashes between the police and activists of a rights movement amid a wheel-jam and shutter-down strike across the territory on Friday and Saturday, which left at least one police official dead and more than 90 others injured, officials told Dawn.com on Saturday. Mirpur Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP) Kamran Ali had said that Sub-inspector Adnan Qureshi succumbed to a gunshot wound in the chest in the town of Islamgarh, where he was deployed to stop a rally for Muzaffarabad under the banner of the Jammu Kashmir Joint Awami Action Committee (JAAC). The JAAC, which has traders at the forefront in most parts of the state, has been seeking the provision of electricity as per hydropower generation cost in AJK, subsidised wheat flour and an end to the privileges of the elite class. They called for the strike following the arrest of at least 70 of their members in raids on Thursday. Reports emerged in the wake of the protests on Sunday that three Rangers battalions had entered the territory through Kohala and were awaiting further orders. However, AJK Minister for Rural Development Faisal Mumtaz Rathore confirmed that the Rangers, due to the intervention of President Asif Zardari, were called back as soon as they entered Azad Kashmir since the situation had calmed down. Meanwhile, in Islamabad, former prime minister of AJK Sardar Abdul Qayyum Niazi slammed the deployment, calling it a drama and an attempt to score political points. First they send them, then call them back, what is this? the ex-AJK PM said. Those fighting for their rights and engaging in protest are free to do so, but they must remain peaceful, Niazi said in a press conference. He added that they (the protestors) must not give the enemy a chance to sow discord within the territory and create infighting. In a post on Facebook, Rathore acknowledged the public demands for cheap electricity, but admitted that addressing them was out of his hands. The big demand of the people, the demand for cheap electricity and the end of loadshedding, falls under the jurisdiction of the Government of Pakistan, Rathore said. Urging the public to remain peaceful, he said, In this one year [I have been in office], I have never been against the right to peaceful protest and [never] supported violence against people. In the aftermath of the protests, JAAC leader Shaukat Nawaz Mir reiterated that the committee is a peaceful organisation and willing to negotiate with the authorities to ensure the provision of cheap electricity and cheap flour. He also appreciated the withdrawal of the Rangers from the area. We have planned another shutter-down strike, he told reporters on Sunday. We have been peaceful for the last year and always will be a peaceful movement. This territory and its institutions and police are our own. Mir maintained that the JAAC is advocating for the rights of the public in AJK, but it is the bureaucrats who do not understand the publics needs that are doing the damage. The JAAC is peaceful and open to negotiations, Mir added, requesting to be notified by the authorities about decisions taken. We do not want to hurt anyone. He also slammed the federal government for not cutting down spending while at the same time claiming they have no room in the budget to subsidise electricity or flour. The government claims they cant provide cheap electricity and flour because they have no budget, but they have the money for watches and cars, Mir said, adding that the federal government and the prime minister should be ashamed. I dont want my forum to be controversial, Mir said. We are made up of respectable politicians  the local council is standing with us. The JAAC leader added that the movement was successful since members of multiple parties and councils are on our side. Our nation is conscious now. There is no politics here, we just want our rights and identity. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Fight till the last ball, PCB chief tells cricket team in Dublin
Description : Pakistan Cricket Board (PCB) Chairman Mohsin Naqvi on Sunday told the national team to fight till the last ball ahead of the second match of a three-match T20 series against Ireland. As he met players of the mens national team in the Irish capital of Dublin, the PCB quoted him as saying: Fight till the last ball; the competition should be apparent.
On Friday, Ireland recorded their maiden T20 win against Pakistan who could not defend a solid-looking 182-5 after being put in to bat first, dealing a shocking blow to the Babar Azam-led sides preparations for the World Cup, which is taking place next month in the United States. The loss to Ireland, who are in Pakistans group in the T20 World Cup, came after a series draw on home soil to a New Zealand squad missing most of their first-choice players. With Babar only recently reinstated as captain, it was another bump in the road for their tournament preparation.
Todays match will start at 7pm, with Ireland leading the series by 1-0. In a post on X, the PCB shared a video of Naqvi meeting the Green Shirts and speaking to them, adding that a detailed discussion on the action plan took place during the two-hour-long meetup. Encouraging the team, the PCB chairman urged the players to play with hard work, passion and a professional approach. He noted that T20 cricket needed a unique and aggressive approach, adding that victory was only possible if cricket was played in a modern manner. An action plan can be formulated while sitting in a room but the real test is on the ground, where the performance should be visible, the PCB quoted him as telling the team. Naqvi praised all players as undoubtedly talented, professional and the best, adding that the teams bowling attack was splendid. However, he emphasised that great attention was required when fielding so that the opponent cannot get any chance to score. The players are the hope for Pakistan and you have to meet the nations expectations. Teamwork is the fundamental thing for victory, the PCB chairman said. He noted that the public loved cricket and had expectations from the team. Naqvi said that success would come if all 11 of the players in the team performed with unity. No one is accepting the loss in the first match against Ireland. The real test after Ireland and England is the World Cup, he added. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Canada arrests fourth Indian national in killing of Sikh activist
Description : A fourth Indian national was charged by Canadian authorities on Saturday in the 2023 killing of a separatist Sikh leader in Vancouver. Amandeep Singh, 22, was already being held for unrelated gun charges before being charged with first-degree murder and conspiracy to commit murder in the slaying of Hardeep Singh Nijjar. Three other Indian nationals were arrested this month. The killing sparked a diplomatic row between Ottawa and New Delhi when Prime Minister Justin Trudeau linked Indian intelligence to the killing. Nijjar  who immigrated to Canada in 1997 and became a citizen in 2015  had advocated for a separate Sikh state, known as Khalistan, carved out of India. He had been wanted by Indian authorities for alleged terrorism and conspiracy to commit murder  allegations he denied. He was shot dead on June 18, 2023, by masked assailants in the parking lot of the Sikh temple he led in suburban Vancouver. Trudeau announced several months later that Canada had credible allegations connecting Indian intelligence to the slaying. India dismissed the allegations as absurd and responded furiously, briefly curbing visas for Canadians and forcing Ottawa to withdraw diplomats. In November, the US Justice Department charged an Indian citizen living in the Czech Republic with allegedly plotting a similar assassination attempt on American soil. Prosecutors said in unsealed court documents that an Indian government official was also involved in the planning. The shock allegations came after US President Joe Biden hosted Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi for a rare state visit, as Washington seeks closer ties with India against Chinas growing influence. US intelligence agencies have assessed that the plot on American soil was approved by Indias top spy official at the time, Samant Goel, the Washington Post reported in April. Canada is home to some 770,000 Sikhs, who make up about two per cent of the countrys population, with a vocal minority calling for an independent state of Khalistan. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Second night of auroras seen amid extreme solar storm
Description : Auroras lit up skies across swaths of the planet for the second night in a row on Saturday, after already dazzling Earthlings from the United States to Tasmania to the Bahamas the day before. A powerful solar storm  which could continue into Sunday  has triggered spectacular celestial shows usually confined to the far northern reaches of the planet, hence their nickname of the northern lights. I have the sensation of living through a historic night in France [] It was really charged, with solar particles and emotions, Eric Lagadec, an astrophysicist at the Observatoire de Cote dAzur, wrote on social media after the first night. Find good spots, away from the lights, with a clear view to the north! Late on Saturday evening, pictures again started trickling onto social media as people in the United States reported sightings, though not as strong as Friday nights. The first of several coronal mass ejections (CMEs)  expulsions of plasma and magnetic fields from the Sun   came just after 4pm GMT on Friday, according to the US-based National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)s Space Weather Prediction Center (SWPC). It was later upgraded to an extreme geomagnetic storm   the first since the Halloween Storms of October 2003 that caused blackouts in Sweden and damaged power infrastructure in South Africa. Fridays storm was listed as hitting level five geomagnetic conditions  the highest on the scale. Saturday saw G3 to G5 conditions, with G4 or higher conditions predicted Sunday and G3 conditions possible into Monday. But no major disruptions to power or communications networks appear to have been reported this time around, despite initial worries from authorities. There have only been preliminary reports of power grid irregularities, degradation to high-frequency communications, GPS and possibly satellite navigation, the SWPC said. Elon Musk, whose Starlink satellite internet operator has some 5,000 satellites in low Earth orbit, said his satellites were under a lot of pressure, but holding up so far. However Chinas National Centre for Space Weather issued a red alert on Saturday morning, warning the storm will impact communications and navigation in most areas of the country, state news agency Xinhua reported. Auroras were visible in the northern half of the country, according to media reports. Excitement over the phenomenon   and otherworldly photos of pink, green and purple night skies   popped up across the world, from Mont Saint-Michel on the French coast to Payette, Idaho  in the western United States  to Australias island state of Tasmania.
People pose for photos as a geomagnetic storm lights up the night sky above the Bonneville Salt Flats on May 10 in Wendover, Utah.  AFP
Unlike solar flares, which travel at the speed of light and reach Earth in around eight minutes, CMEs travel at a more sedate pace, with officials putting the current average at 800 kilometres per second. The CMEs emanated from a massive sunspot cluster that is 17 times wider than our planet. People with eclipse glasses can also look for the sunspot cluster during the day. The Sun is approaching the peak of an 11-year cycle that brings heightened activity. NOAAs Brent Gordon encouraged the public to try to capture the night sky with phone cameras even if they couldnt see auroras with their naked eyes. Youd be amazed at what you see in that picture versus what you see with your eyes. Fluctuating magnetic fields associated with geomagnetic storms induce currents in long wires, including power lines, which can potentially lead to blackouts. Long pipelines can also become electrified, leading to engineering problems. Spacecraft are also at risk from high doses of radiation, although the atmosphere prevents this from reaching Earth. NASA has a dedicated team looking into astronaut safety and can ask astronauts on the International Space Station to move to places within the outpost that are better shielded. Even pigeons and other species that have internal biological compasses could be affected. Pigeon handlers have noted a reduction in birds coming home during geomagnetic storms, according to NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The most powerful geomagnetic storm in recorded history, known as the Carrington Event after British astronomer Richard Carrington, occurred in September 1859. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : ADB links support with IMFs clean chit
Description :   Given my interactions with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the dialogue decisiveness of the current government, I feel very hopeful that there will be a successor programme from the Fund, said the Asian Development Banks (ADB) Country Director for Pakistan Yong Ye in an exclusive interview on the sidelines of ADBs 57th Annual Meeting in Tbilisi this week. Tacitly indicating that support from ADB would only be possible with a clean chit from the Fund, Mr Ye expressed cautious optimism for the economy. Highlighting the uncertainties from last year, Mr Ye termed the IMF agreement announced in June as a miracle. Since then, however, he said, the caretaker government did a good job stabilising the economy under the Funds Stand-By Arrangement. More importantly, he added, with the IMF agreement in place, the central banks foreign exchange reserves increased from $4.4 billion to over $9bn in the week ending on May 3. While the country may still be in the ICU, its immediate liquidity crisis has been sorted, and default has been avoided. This has given some confidence to the markets, he said. Record highs of PSX Commenting on the frequent new highs of the Pakistan Stock Exchange (PSX), Mr Ye observed that previously, when the eurobond payment was due, there had been a lot of hype in the media with speculations about whether the country would be able to repay or default. Such pieces did not induce courage and the markets started fluctuating, contributing to a fluctuating exchange rate. Banks top official says Pakistan has sorted out immediate liquidity crisis, but still in ICU This time around, in April, when the $1bn eurobond payment was due, it was paid without fanfare, indicating much better market confidence. Other positive indicators, such as a narrowing external account deficit and recovering remittances, have also improved investor confidence. However, fiscal deficit challenges remain. One major reason behind them is the high interest rate and high debt servicing burden. Act on what you know In my first meeting with Finance Minister Muhammad Aurangzeb, he showed his commitment to implementing and acting on reforms, said Mr Ye. Pakistan does not need more economic prescriptions, he said, agreeing with the finance ministers recent statements. He said the general perception is that Pakistan knows what it needs to do but never does it. Act on what you know needs to be done. He emphasised that the ADB management wants to be with the government in this difficult time. The agency understands the need to ensure that the debt is sustainable rather than an added burden that does not remove the constraints the country is facing. While the economy is recovering, there is still uncertainty moving forward. The removal of this uncertainty depends very much on the governments commitment and ability to implement economic and structural reforms. A special arrangement Mr Ye emphasised the importance of investment in reviving the economy and the role the Special Investment Facilitation Council (SIFC) could play. My understanding of SIFC is that it is a special arrangement to attract foreign direct investment from some targeted countries, he said. From the ADBs point of view, while the SIFC may be a quick short-term solution, Pakistan still needs to look for long-term systematic solutions to attract foreign direct investment. This would require an overall enabling environment with improved regulations and transparency. Given past unsuccessful incidents such as Reko Diq, SIFC, at least in the short run, can demonstrate the countrys potential and ability for investment, which can then be further broadened for other countries. An important element in attracting FDI is the ability of firms to repatriate profit out of the country. At the moment, investors may believe that while earning money in Pakistan is possible, repatriating profits is challenging. Non-productivity of real estate The country needs to increase its revenue and rationalise expenditures, Mr Ye remarked. As an example, he highlights the real estate sector where a lot of savings are invested. The real estate sector is just financial addition with no value addition. If the country invests in its natural resources instead, the country will start rolling, he said. Inflation is on a downward trend, and if this trend continues, the monetary policy rate will come down, Mr Ye opinioned, resulting in a smaller burden of debt servicing and more fiscal room. This will also unlock the investment and borrowing by the private sector, he hoped. Since there is a lot of pent-up investment demand during the period of high interest rates, Pakistan may enter into a boom cycle when the rates start coming down. But for the revival to be sustainable, it all comes back to reforms, he said.  Remaining pledges While ADB was among the institutions that pledged support after the disastrous floods of 2022, almost the entire amount has yet to be disbursed. ADB had pledged about $1.5bn, of which only $108.79 million has been released according to a media report, with a further $340.9m expected this year. In response to why there has been a delay, Mr Ye said that the amount pledged was for reconstruction and that the process cannot be rushed. The damages have to be assessed along with the ground realities, keeping in mind the new climate risk profile and the possibility that these areas may be flooded again, he said. Pointing out that water was still standing in some areas till the start of this year, Mr Ye said that the new climate risk profile needs to be assessed before the feasibility study. Some roads need to be redesigned, followed by the procurement process, contract award, and finally, disbursement. The entire process is lengthy. Mr Ye identified several critical areas for Pakistans long-term economic growth. These include controlling inflation, reducing the fiscal deficit, and diversifying the export base. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Govt hints at raising wheat purchase target
Description :  Drive to buy 400,000 tonnes of grain kicks off; farmers want wheat procured from across Punjab
 Kissan leader urges govt to ensure official rate of staple, terms proposed subsidy a pittance LAHORE: The Pakistan Agricultural Storage and Services Corporation Limited (Passco) on Saturday began its second phase of wheat procurement from Faisalabad in line with a decision of the federal government to procure 400,000 tonnes more than the original target of 1.4 million tonnes. As he kick-started the second phase, Food Minister Rana Tanveer hinted at the possibility of further increasing the target to facilitate farmers. Passco had originally aimed to purchase 1.4m tonnes, but after farmers started protesting, the pressure on the federal and provincial governments piled on and the premier decided to increase the target to 1.8m tonnes. As of now, Passco has achieved 98 per cent of the initial target and distribution of gunny bags is already underway to meet the increased target. Farmers, however, are not happy with the governments decision to procure slightly more wheat than intended. They said Passco  a federal body  operated in 13 out of 97 tehsils in Punjab and the decision to purchase additional wheat from designated areas would have a negligible impact. According to farmers, the tradeable surplus this year is expected to be about 10m tonnes and buying 400,000 tonnes would hardly make any difference. Punjab, on the other hand, is reluctant to procure wheat from growers despite province-wide agitations and the persistent stance of farmers. This has also caused a significant impact on the price of wheat, with the staple being sold at a rate much lower than the official price of Rs3,900 per 40kg. The Pakistan Kissan Ittehad claimed that farmers had lost Rs1,150 billion under the wheat head alone due to the crashing prices which reportedly dipped below Rs3,000 per 40kg. Instead of procurement, the Punjab government said it would compensate farmers with interest-free loans of Rs150bn. Kissan leader Khalid Mahmood Khokar, however, is not impressed, saying the paltry subsidy came at a cost of Rs1,150bn. Instead of this gimmickry, please ensure an officially declared price, which the provincial government had itself calculated, announced, and promised, Mr Khalid urged the Punjab government. The crisis Pakistan is going through the most difficult wheat season of its history, exacerbated by policy failure and the import of millions of tonnes of wheat shortly before the bumper harvest. The bumper crop followed a record import of 3.5m tonnes by the private sector allegedly due to the weakness of the caretaker regime.
Against the backdrop of such a huge import, hoarders also released their stock to earn profit. The releases of stock by the hoarders and the import of the commodity flooded the market and even met the entire domestic requirement, leaving Passco and the Punjab Food Department with 4m tonnes of unexhausted stock. The 3.5m tonnes imports were staggered in a way, in the name of sustained supplies, that it overlapped with domestic harvesting season and created havoc for the domestic market, explained Muhammad Ramzan, a wheat trader from Lahore. At the start of this month, the Punjab government had promised a probe into the wheat scandal against the backdrop of protests by the farmers. On Friday, the farmers resumed their protests from Multan against the provincial governments decision to not buy wheat from farmers. At the protest, PKI leader Khokhar had said the agitation would continue against the government in every district of the province till the acceptance of their demands. He had said the federal government was procuring the wheat in 16 tehsils of the province, while the Punjab government had not purchased even a single grain so far. Federal government should also buy wheat from other tehsils of the province, he had demanded. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : KP governor, CM Gandapur exchange threats in acrid spat
Description : PESHAWAR / DERA ISMAIL KHAN: The acrimony between Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Chief Minister Ali Amin Khan Gandapur and Governor Faisal Karim Kundi intensified on Saturday when the two leaders threatened each other with dire consequences. A day after the governors fiery speech, Chief Minister Gandapur warned Governor Kundi to stay within the limits of his constitutional position and avoid making olitical statements. After appearing in an anti-terrorism court in connection with the murder of former KP law minister Sardar Israrullah Khan Gandapur, the CM who belongs to the PTI said he could use his powers to banish Mr Kundi from Governor House. This Governor House is not your property. Dont force me to  turn it into a museum and open it for the public.
I will shift you to a two-room annexe, said Mr Gandapur. He went on to say that even fuel for the governors official vehicles comes from the budget of the provincial government and threatened to stop it if the governor who belongs to PPP didnt refrain from political statements, below-the-belt remarks and confrontation. Gandapur warns Kundi will be banished from official residence for indulging in politics, confrontation Youre the governor; politics is not your job, Mr Gandapur warned, calling himself the elected representative who came to power with the voters mandate. The CM added that if the governor did not pay heed to his warning, he would seek his removal. [T]he letter which notified you [as governor] will also denotify you. In a hard-hitting speech on Friday, Governor Kundi had indirectly accused the CM of being involved in the killing of former law minister Mr Israrullah and ANP leader Umar Khattab Sherani.
Mr Israrullah was killed in a suicide attack in his hometown of Kulachi near Dera Ismail Khan in October 2013. While government officials blamed the Waziristan-based Gandapur group for the bombing, a little-known shadowy group, Ansarul Mujahideen, claimed responsibility. ANPs Mr Sherani was murdered in December 2021, a day before the provinces local government elections, which he was contesting as a candidate for the post of D.I. Khan mayor. The governor said that if he relinquished his constitutional post, he would prove to be a bigger nemesis for CM Gandapur. Mr Kundi also warned that protecting the Governor House was his constitutional duty and whoever tried to occupy it would be dragged on roads. This was an apparent reply to Mr Gandapurs May 9 statement in which he warned against efforts to impose governors rule in KP and said PTI activists would occupy the Governor House. Want good ties with CM Meanwhile, in conversation with Dawn, Mr Kundi said he hoped for good relations with the chief minister, but whoever talked about occupying the Governor House will be answered befittingly. People of KP shouldnt suffer in the fight between the prime minister, governor and chief minister, he said, advising the provincial government to improve the law and order situation. He recalled the kidnapping of a sessions judge in Tank last month and claimed the chief minister paid extortion money for his release. Expected animosity The acrimonious relationship between the two leaders  both being bitter political rivals hailing from D.I.Khan  was expected since Mr Kundi was nominated for the post by his partys chairman, Bilawal Bhutto-Zardari. The CM expressed his disapproval of the appointment by not attending  Mr Kundis oath-taking ceremony last Saturday. A few days later, on May 8, the governor KP did not sign a summary moved by the provincial government to convene an assembly session, forcing the provincial government to requisition the session through the speaker to present the current fiscal budget, according to sources. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Footprints: the day the city of Karachi went berserk
Description : This article was originally published on May 12, 2017 KARACHI: Attempt after attempt fails to elicit comments from direct witnesses to the carnage that took place in Karachi on May 12 ten years ago. All these men served as judges in the countrys high courts and the apex court before they retired to re-join the legal fraternity as seasoned practitioners of the law. For each of my requests, I receive either excuse me, or sorry. Finally, one of them agrees to talk  but not openly.  Please dont mention my name, says the retired Sindh High Court judge as our conversation ends. You may write each and every word I have shared with you but not my name. I would prefer to be an anonymous source. One never knows here what can happen the next day: its better to stay away from even the memories of such controversial events. The ordeal he recalls of that bloody Saturday refreshes the grim memories of the city being under siege for nearly 24 hours, held hostage by forces in the face of whom even jurists and law-enforcers were helpless.  Two rival rallies had been planned that day  one by the legal fraternity, backed by parties then in the opposition, to welcome into the city the then deposed chief justice, Iftikhar Mohammed Chaudhry, and the other organised by the Muttahida Qaumi Movement (MQM), favoured by the then military dictator General Pervez Musharraf, in protest against the politicisation of the issue of the presidential reference against Mr Chaudhry. A certain level of fear had prevailed, but no one could have guessed the deeply disturbing events that were to follow  certainly not the then serving high court judge. I was travelling with my driver and armed guard to the Sindh High Court where the chief justice had to deliver an address when we were forced to stop near Sir Syed Girls College in Nazimabad, he says.  Armed motorcyclists surrounded his official, flag-bearing car, pulled out his driver and switched off its engine, seizing the keys. The bikers then bludgeoned the stationary car several times, so hard that its bumper fell off. In one of the busiest and most densely populated city neighbourhoods, a serving judge sat in fear.  I talked to them, he says. They were obviously aware that I was a high court judge. After debate and argument, they allowed me to leave but I reminded them that I couldnt because keys of my car had been snatched by one of them. Finally, the key was returned and the judge was allowed to leave. As he got back into his car, the men surrounding him came up with their last strike: they stripped his car of the national flag. At the nearest police station of Pak Colony, he waited for nearly two hours for police security to arrive, as promised by the Governors House after it was informed about the episode. Then came an SSP-ranking officer with his team to escort me, he says. The police left us some two kilometres from the Singh High Court building, saying that they could no longer help us. My driver parked the car at a safer place. Then, with my driver and guard, I walked to the high court to find all entrances blocked. Finally, I jumped over one of the walls to enter the building. If this was the experience of a high court judge, one can only imagine the situation for political workers. In anticipation of the two rallies, law enforcers had been put on high alert the day before. The fire brigade had been directed to remain on standby and hospitals were asked to ready themselves. But the next day, hapless citizens found that the city had been abandoned by the law-enforcement agencies, and armed youths were wandering at will. Nasir Khan, one of the Awami National Party workers, witnessed a few of them at Malir Halt. I meet Nasir almost at the same spot where he narrowly escaped death. As our rally from Quaidabad reached here [Malir Halt], it came under fire, he says. I miraculously remained unhurt but I watched two of my friends die from bullet wounds and several others fell injured. It was a terrible experience and even today I shiver while recalling that day. After 10 years, only eyewitness accounts of the May 12 events remain. Justice and any action on the part of the state are still awaited. Should we call ourselves humanity when the fallen remain un-avenged a year to a day since that fateful day in May? wrote Justice Qazi Faez Isa, a Supreme Court judge and former chief justice of the Balochistan High Court, in this paper in 2008. Years later, the question remains pertinent. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2017  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Mothers Day: Reflections of a mother
Description : This piece was originally published in Dawn, Young World on May 9, 2020. Spending sleepless nights while tending to children, feeding them, changing diapers, etc. are a part of life of every mother having infants. When the infants grow up a little, the next phase is to educate them, teach them manners and make them learn to be a part of the world out there. It is tough to do all that for me, like every other mother. After all it is not all I have to do. One has to focus on ones career and household chores at the same time, and fulfil ones duties towards other family members. Did I mention a me-time somewhere in all that I said? I guess not. There is no mentioning of it simply because there is no time left for me while doing all that I do. It is said that you learn about the true value of parents once you have children of your own. I have found this to be exactly true. The sacrifices and unconditional love it takes to be a mother has certainly made me realise the sacrifices my mother made in bringing me up. Looking back at my life, I wish I could change all those moments in my life when, as a child, I misbehaved with my mother. I also wish that I had spent more time with her and made life easier for her. As my children grow up, they seem to become less obedient and respectful. This really hurts. I see this as a general trend in all the children, nowadays. With some exceptions, the older they get, the less respect they show to their mother and elders in general. Having a mind of ones own is fine, but there cannot be any excuse for bad behaviour towards ones mother. And also just because your mother is less strict and more friendly than your father, it should not lead you to not show respect to her. Mothers like me do not want our children to be our puppets. All we ask for is recognition of our love and efforts. Expecting respectfulness is a part of that recognition. Every mother would love her child to come up to her and, as a minimum, thank her for her efforts. It would be great if the child could offer to help her in little ways. If nothing else, they should at least not leave any mess for the mother to clean up! Mothers Day is important, but it is more than just a special day. It is really a reminder that mothers deserve our respect and recognition for their love at all times. For a child to have this realisation certainly means more to mothers than having a card or flowers on Mothers Day. This is because it means that this realisation would translate into care and respect for ones mother. For my part, I have started taking care of my mother in all the ways I can. While I do not live with her, I try my best to stay in touch or visit her as much as I can. Taking care of her health and what she wants has become very important for me. It does not matter to me what others do or say about taking care of their mothers. All that matters is what my mother deserves. And that exactly is my message to you all! Do not look at what others do, think of what you can do for your mother, who deserves all the love and respect that one can. Mothers can be your friends too if you learn to share things with her. It is just a misunderstanding that they would not understand you or what you want. You can talk about anything with her: sports, cartoons, TV shows, super heroes, general knowledge, etc. You would be pleasantly surprised when you do end up confiding in her or discussing things with her. I am lucky that I get cards and flowers from my family on Mothers Day. But many things remain left to be desired on the other 364 days of the year. Still whatever my children do the rest of the year, I would never stop caring for and loving them. I guess thats what the motherhood is all about. Happy Mothers Day everyone, but make every day Mothers Day, for she never fails to make everyday special for her children. Published in Dawn, Young World, May 9th, 2020 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Indian elections
Description : THE Islamophobic rhetoric being employed by Narendra Modi for this election campaign has become shrill. Pakistan has nearly always been an electoral issue in India. However, this time, it is Indian Muslims who are bearing the brunt of the Indian prime ministers hate speech. Speaking in Rajasthan last month, he called Muslims infiltrators and said they produce too many children. In Gujarat, where, as chief minister, he had overseen the massacre of Muslims in 2002, he accused the Congress of seeking to loot Indias wealth and redistribute it among Muslims, and of organising a vote jihad against his leadership. Later, he accused the Congress and Muslims of stealing Hindu wealth and property.
Modis inflammatory rhetoric was followed by the BJPs campaign video portraying Muslims as outsiders who plundered Indias wealth. As concerns grew about communal violence, the video was removed. These allegations are a sequel to Modis public referencing of earlier conspiracy theories of love jihad (Muslims forcibly converting Hindu women and marrying them to increase the Muslim population) or land jihad (capturing land to construct religious structures and gaining control of Indias territory). Concerns that his rhetoric might incite further violence against Indian Muslims are increasing. Ordinarily, since Hindus are in a majority in India, it may be difficult to question the rationale of creating a Hindu state. However, two observations are in order. One, the expansionist designs of the cherished Hindu state seek the creation of an Akhand Bharat, a Hindu right fantasy, which would violate the territorial integrity of Nepal, Bangladesh, Pakistan, and Afghanistan, as per a map displayed in the new parliament building. This is not acceptable to the aforementioned independent states. Two, though the creation of a Hindu state should not translate into discrimination against minorities, regrettably this will be the case. The works of French political scientist Christophe Jaffrelot illustrate how Muslims, 14.5 per cent of Indias population, are grossly underrepresented in bureaucracy, the judiciary, police, and legislative organs. They are second-class citizens.
The Muslim-majority area of Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmiri is also being subjected to demographic engineering. The destruction of the centuries-old Babri Masjid by Hindu zealots in 1992 and the construction of a temple in its place has set a precedent that might be followed for other historic mosques. This contrasts sharply with the UAEs gesture of permitting a Hindu temple in Abu Dhabi. Modis anti-Muslim rhetoric is raising concerns of violence. Analysts are also pointing out the fascist tendencies of the BJP regime, a steep decline in democratic values, and a departure from the moorings of pluralism and secularism on which modern India was founded. In her book The Incarcerations, Alpa Shah contends that Modis India is using its national security apparatus to incarcerate ordinary citizens for their dissenting views. Commenting on the book, Arundhati Roy stated that this was about criminalisation and incarceration of dissent itself. Strikingly, the Modi regime has also used art and culture to project the Hindutva philosophy. Kunal Purohits book H-Pop: The Secretive World of Hindutva Pop Stars shows how Hindutva pop stars and influencers are being used to spread the message of Hindu supremacy and create acceptance of Hindutvas core beliefs. Apart from this, Modi is playing on his governments accomplishments: making India the worlds fifth largest economy; the construction of 50,000 kilometres of national highways; boosting Indias military spending; building Vikrant, Indias first domestically built aircraft carrier; and the Chandrayaan-3 moon landing. His prospects of winning a third term have been bolstered by a weak opposition. Despite the formation of the Congress-led 37-party INDIA coalition, there is no real challenge. What has bolstered his outreach is Indias enhanced global standing. In his book Why Bharat Matters, S. Jaishankar presents India as a leader of the global south and makes a case for the rejuvenation of India as a civilisational state.
There are some lessons that Pakistan could learn from Indias electoral process. One, despite the large scale of Indias elections (969 million registered voters; 1m polling stations) and the use of electronic voting machines, election results are largely accepted without much ado. Two, there is no caretaker government, as the incumbents become caretakers in a way, and refrain from announcing major policy decisions or sanctioning expenditure for development schemes. If Modi wins a third term, he is likely to maintain his pro-Hindutva, anti-Muslim, and hegemonic attitude towards regional countries, particularly Pakistan. The write is a former foreign secretary and chairman of Sanober Institute Islamabad. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Who can rock the hybrid boat?
Description : A NUMBER of developments over the past week suggest that the establishment is keen to enforce/ maintain the status quo and the only impediment in its path may be an assertive superior judiciary that has been increasingly finding its feet in recent weeks. If jailed PTI leader and former prime minister Imran Khans article in UKs conservative right-wing Telegraph newspaper blaming the military leadership directly for all his woes the week before was not hint enough of the state of play, two public statements by the latter clarified issues rather unambiguously. The first came in the DG ISPRs press briefing, which was ostensibly called to discuss Afghanistan-based terrorist groups involvement in attacks on Chinese nationals working on development projects in the country. But in response to a couple of questions about the PTI and Imran Khan related to the events of May 9 last year, the DG ISPR stated unequivocally that the only path to rehabilitation for the political party and its leaders was to seek forgiveness for attacking your own forces.
Then, perhaps, talks could happen and that too with political parties (ie, the government), as the military had nothing to do with politics. Imran Khan has been consistent in saying he wouldnt talk to the powerless political parties and that a meaningful dialogue is possible only with the military. The DG ISPR also lamented the delay in the prosecution and sentencing of all those responsible for the May mayhem  including the leaders and mastermind against whom irrefutable evidence has been gathered and submitted  and, in doing so, appeared to hint at the establishments frustrations with what it perceives as roadblocks being erected by the judiciary. The content of the live presser evoked an equally adamant response from the PTI, which went on the offensive, reiterating its stance that May 9 was a false flag operation, accusing the militarys spokesman of being economical with the truth, and saying it would be happy to live with the findings of an impartial judicial commission into the May 9 events and would even apologise if found to be at fault. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. The military spokesman had pre-empted this demand in his briefing earlier by saying if a probe were to happen, as was being demanded, it ought to start with 2014, and not nine years later. The 2014 PTI sit-in in the federal capital was said to have been instigated and backed by the then ISI chief. This was the first indication that the military was prepared to hold its own accountable for past follies, if it paved the way for the trials and sentencing of PTI leaders it says were responsible for the attacks on defence installations in a number of cities in Punjab and KP. While the spokesman left nothing to the imagination, on the first anniversary of May 9, the army chief added his voice to his chief spokesmans in terms of stressing the need for punishing the perpetrators of the violence a year earlier, also lashing out against what he called digital terrorism.
This indicates that harsher curbs on social media are planned. So far, the PTI has had overwhelming social media dominance and had been able to keep a step ahead of its adversaries, but we will find out soon whether it has what it takes to bypass software the Chinese have developed over the years (and Pakistan has reportedly acquired) and successfully used to block dissident content. With this ever-widening gulf between the establishment and the party it once saw as a panacea for all that ails Pakistan, the one thing that many felt could force a rethink in the establishment would have been a public manifestation of the immense support enjoyed by the PTI, as evidenced in last Februarys elections. Many Pakistan watchers keenly waited all day for multitudes of PTI supporters to spill out onto the roads and streets of major urban conurbations on the party leaders call to break the shackles and protest on May 9. But the brutal crackdown of the past one year seems to have knocked the wind out of the partys sails and worn down the workers will. People may turn out to vote for it in droves, but did not appear prepared to risk life, limb and liberty in coming out for mass protests. Some small localised protests did happen, but had zero impact in the sense of influencing decision-making in the corridors of power. Going forward, a couple of factors will play a role in steering developments. The first and foremost will be the confidence the army chief has in his control over his institution. His predecessor appointed a dozen major generals to three stars in his final six weeks in office and left the incumbent little room in terms of forming his own team. Natural attrition and the more dramatic exit of a couple of three stars on disciplinary grounds recently has, 18 months down the line, given the chief an opportunity to place senior officers of his own choosing in key roles which will give him greater freedom of action both inside and outside the institution. The promotion of three officers this week, including the DG ISPR, to three stars was another step in that direction. The military saw May 9 as a coup against the chief, a failed attempt to dislodge him from office. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. With the PTI protests failing to gather momentum, the only impediment in his path seems to be an increasingly assertive superior judiciary. It can and will, in all likelihood, challenge the establishments pre-eminence in decision-making. It isnt clear how the latter plans to deal with that, especially because it believes that a direly needed economic revival is only possible under the umbrella of a hybrid set-up and in a relatively calm political environment. Only the judiciary can rock its boat now. The writer is a former editor of Dawn. abbas.nasir@hotmail.com Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Looming pension crisis cries out for corrective measures
Description : Pension reform is again a hot topic, but this time, bureaucrats will make it appear as if it is intended to benefit top officials. The reforms go beyond just raising the retirement age or taxing pensions. Instead, a series of actions, similar to those that were done in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP), should be seriously considered to reduce the cost of pensions to the government exchequer. The national pension cost will reach nearly Rs2 trillion in FY24, and it is predicted to rise to Rs10tr in the next decade if no reforms are implemented. In 2002-03, the pension cost stood at Rs25 billion, but in a span of just 20 years, it skyrocketed to over Rs1.5tr. Pension reforms have previously been tested in KP and generated the expected cost-saving results. It is high time to rationalise the existing pension programme and transition to more modern schemes available in developing and developed countries. Last week, Finance Minister Muhammad Aurangzeb proposed to raise the retirement age from 60 to 65 years. It has sparked controversy over whether the government intends to benefit only a select few individuals. This decision has both advantages and disadvantages. In KP, the age restriction was raised to 63 years in 2019 with a projected annual savings of Rs20bn. However, the decision was reversed due to strong protest from bureaucrats, and the court also overturned the decision. However, KPs other pension reforms remained in effect. KP Advisor on Finance Muzzammil Aslam has a different take on raising the age restriction than his predecessor, who implemented a series of reforms. Mr Aslam believes that the lump sum payment of pension payments will be delayed for the next five years, providing some breathing room for the time being. This will allow the government to show a lower budget deficit. The net impact will increase when the five-year allowances are added to the basic salary, which will be used to pay the pension. The age extension will postpone payments, but total payouts to employees will climb over the following five years. While these efforts provide some relief in the short term, crucial steps must be implemented to address the increasing pension liabilities. The governments liabilities have jumped from Rs25bn in FY03 to Rs2tr in FY24 There is another idea to tax pensions. It may also face political challenges. However, the KP government has imposed a 5pc pension tax on grades 17 and above on their executive allowance. It is estimated that this measure alone will generate Rs150bn in contributions to a pay-as-you-go pension system. This was not an easy decision, but it was made in KP to obtain some contribution from existing employees. The federal government can look into this step in response to opposition to taxing pensions. KP reforms In 2004, based on recommendations from a World Bank project, the India implemented a national pension scheme wherein employee contributions are matched by the government. Pakistan did not choose to adopt it since it was not anticipated that the cost would rise so dramatically over the next 20 years. Taimur Khan Jhagra, former finance minister of KP, took the lead in implementing a series of pension reforms, including the introduction of a contributory pension scheme for new employees beginning July 1, 2022. Few substantial changes were made to the existing pension programme. A well-known 13-tier pension system was in place, covering the pensioners widow, children, parents, siblings, sisters, and grandchildren. KP confined it to direct dependents. The federal government did the same last year, but other provinces have not followed suit. The previous PTI government raised KP and Punjabs minimum retirement age to 55 from 45, reducing KPs pension bill by Rs20bn alone. KP consolidated various pensions into a single one. Previously, individuals could receive two pensions simultaneously, with an active employee receiving both a salary and a pension. The major reform is the implementation of a contributing pension scheme for new employees. Under this programme, the KP government contributes 12pc and employees contribute 10pc. So far, 40,000 staff have been hired under this system starting July 1, 2022. There are additional critical reforms that the KP and federal governments should implement, such as revisiting the single Universal Pay Scale between Grades 1 and 22. Pay in provinces is decoupled from the Centre and between departments, allowing each department to develop a pay scale appropriate for their budget and the market value of their professions. Pension reforms are greatly needed. The question is whether the state will be able to sustain pension payments for the next 10 to 15 years. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : SMOKERS CORNER: KHAN AND THE GENERALS
Description : In May 2023, a recorded phone call  allegedly between the mother-in-law of the former Chief Justice of Pakistan (CJP) Umar Atta Bandial, and the wife of a lawyer-member of Imran Khans populist Pakistan Tehreek-i-Insaf (PTI)  was leaked on social media. In the call, the two ladies can be heard criticising the coalition government made up of the parties that had ousted Khans regime in April 2022 through an act of parliament. At one point in the leaked conversation, the mother-in-law laments, Yeh kambakht martial law bhi tau nahin lagaatay! [These cursed people dont even impose martial law!] Bykambakht,she meant the military establishment (ME). The conversation was surreal on many levels. Khan had been the blue-eyed boy of the ME, until he had a falling out with his makers. From 2011 till he was elected as prime minister in 2018, the ME had successfully shaped Khans political rise in a highly coordinated manner. His popularity was first established within the rank and file of the military. Then, some TV journalists were brought on board, followed by the induction of some vital members of the judiciary.
This troika  the ME, the electronic media and the judiciary  was complimented by the trained social media wing of Khans PTI to proliferate narratives pitched against the two older mainstream parties, the Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) and the Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP). The two were deeply demonised as being corrupt. After his ouster, Imran Khan was convinced that the establishment had betrayed him, and the May 9-10 protests last year were an attempt to rally support amongst pro-Khan factions in the military. However, any military intervention was drastically overestimated by his supporters A constituency that had initially been built by the former military dictator Gen Pervez Musharraf, and which mostly consisted of middle-class and upper-middle-class Pakistanis, was navigated by the ME and the media in such a manner that it eventually fell in Khans lap. This became a quadrilateral elite, comprising the ME, the media, the judiciary and the middle classes. After Khans ouster in April 2022, he began to publicly lambast the ME, accusing it of betraying him. But the truth is, due to the many abject failures of Khans government, the ME had begun to gradually distance itself from him months before he was ousted. In February 2022, Bandial became the CJP. He was cut from the same cloth that at least four of his predecessors were. These included Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry and, even more so, Justice Saqib Nasir, Justice Asif Khosa and Justice Gulzar Ahmad. Anti-PTI parties often accused them of being overtly pro-Khan. Justice Bandial was accused of having a soft corner for Khan. Truth is, Bandial wasnt very good at hiding this soft corner. Now the question is, during the time of the aforementioned phone call leak, when Khan was holding angry rallies and condemning the ME, why was Bandials mother-in-law yearning for a military takeover? Equally surreal was the presence of banners in some pro-Khan rallies with We Want Martial Law written on them. Also, why did the PTI  by planning last years violent riots on May 9 and 10, in which PTI supporters and members attacked military property  believe that this would cause a split in the armed forces and bring pro-Khan generals to power? Many academics who study coups are of the view that, if the conditions allow, street protests can be followed by a coup detat. According to the political scientist Scott A Tyson, protests are often a signal to the elites to intervene.
The elites in this context are the military and political elites. These may also include the higher judiciary and business elites. A regime facing the protests, too, is made up of political elites. Once the anti-regime elites decide that the protests are clearly signalling for an intervention, this is then communicated to the state elites. The media too plays a role in this. Its reporting of the protests may strengthen the signal and galvanise the military to intervene. The mother-in-laws kambakht lament was expressing a desperate yearning within sections of economic elites for military intervention. This nature of signalling was loud and clear on numerous WhatsApp groups when Khan was holding rallies against his ouster. The signal became even more obvious when the We Want Martial Law banners began to appear at the rallies. Some media personnel also started enhancing the signal to the ME. But by late 2022, the MEs top leadership had changed. A general who had earlier exited the project that was set up to facilitate Khans rise became the new army chief. Yet, PTI believed that many remnants of the project were still active within the military. I believe that with the judiciary still in facilitation mode, the notion of causing a split within the military to replace the new military chief with pro-Khan generals was the brainwave of some retired military men who were well-versed in the theories of post-protest coups. Once the signal to intervene in Khans post-ouster rallies was ignored by the new ME, a violent uprising was conceived that was to target the new ME. The uprising was enacted to evoke the concerns of the supposed pro-Khan generals. The signal now was: eject the new army chief and intervene (on the side of Khan) to avoid an all-out civil war. This plan could not have been formulated without the input of some retired officers. Many of them had been quite vocal in their support for Khan.
The violent May 9 and 10 protests were orchestrated by a political elite (PTI) against another set of elites (the coalition government) to signal the need for an intervention to judicial and military elites. But, according to Tyson, whether or not a coup will succeed is generally not certain to elites. This uncertainty is caused by the uncertainty regarding the actions of other elites. The other elite, in the context of the May 9 and 10 riots, was the military. An intervention by pro-Khan officers was drastically overestimated by the planners and the plan collapsed. The coalition government was able to withstand the assault. The new military chief began to swiftly oust the remaining pro-Khan elements from the military  even though those remaining in the judiciary are now trying to avoid suffering a similar fate through a pushback in the name of the independence of the judiciary.This, too, is quite surreal. Published in Dawn, EOS, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : A turbulent 2023
Description : PAKISTAN faced a tumultuous year in 2023 marked by severe economic distress and a sharp erosion of civil liberties. As documented in the HRCPs annual report, the year was nothing short of a human rights crisis on multiple fronts. Economic hardship was pervasive, with back-breaking inflation  nearly 40pc  and low growth hitting the common citizen the hardest. Protests were widespread, ranging from government employees striking against delayed salaries and pension issues to political demonstrations demanding timely elections. The state responded with indifference and sometimes outright violence, underlining its disregard for the peoples constitutional rights. The political arena was no less strained: the year saw unprecedented violence following the arrest of former prime minister Imran Khan; subsequent PTI-led riots were met with harsh government crackdowns. This included mass arrests and the controversial use of military courts for civilian trials. Political dissent was stifled and freedom of speech curtailed with internet shutdowns and media gags on reporting of certain political leaders. Sadly, the governments management of the turmoil involved significant overreach, impacting judicial independence and skewing the electoral landscape. The swift passage of laws granting sweeping powers to intelligence agencies and restricting media freedoms points to the governments alarming propensity to consolidate power at the cost of transparency and accountability.
Human rights violations were not limited to political suppression. The report highlights severe abuses such as enforced disappearances, alleged extrajudicial killings and custodial torture by state agencies. The societal impact of these policies and actions has been devastating. Moreover, marginalised communities, including women, children, religious minorities, and transgender persons, faced increased violence and discrimination. Notable too was the harsh crackdown on peaceful assemblies like the Baloch Yakjehti Councils protests. On the international front, despite engaging with global human rights mechanisms, Pakistans selective adherence to recommendations concerning enforced disappearances and the use of the death penalty reflected a reluctance to fully align with international human rights standards. Rulers would do well to remember that adhering to those standards will help maintain Pakistans desperately needed GSP-Plus status and be a more inviting place for foreign investment.
As the year proceeds, it is imperative for the state to reconsider its approach to human rights. The government must ensure the independence of the judiciary, respect for democratic processes, and protection for all citizens against the abuse of power. Laws that infringe on freedom of expression and assembly should be reviewed and reformed. Additionally, there should be a concerted effort to address the economic inequalities that underpin much of the social unrest. For a stable and prosperous Pakistan, human rights must be more than an ideal; they must be an integral part of governance and everyday life. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Love knows no boundaries at Karachis Edhi Home nursery for special children
Description : KARACHI: Its one day to Mothers Day and the childrens nursery at the Edhi Home in Mithadar is decorated with balloons and posters along with framed photographs of the late couple Abdul Sattar Edhi and Bilquis Edhi. Children in the classrooms are busy making greeting cards, drawing pictures of themselves and the only woman whom they have come to know as their mother, their Chhoti (younger) Mummy Sabah Faisal Edhi. The duties of the busy mother of so many children, including four of her own, starts from early morning. After tending to her own household duties and sending off her youngest, Moosa Edhi, to school, she is in the nursery at 8am sharp, inquiring from the staff there if everyone had a good sleep, if anyone had any issues during the night. It has become a habit with her to visit the nursery first to inquire about her babies before getting to her other work of calling up the other Edhi Homes and Centres, asking about the other children, their health and school progress, asking about the women in their Homes, tending to the marriage proposals, and adoption procedures and planning outings and picnics for the children. When parents discover their babies are not well, they quietly leave them in our cot, says Sabah Edhi as country celebrates Mothers Day today But today, before she can go inside the nursery, she stops in the playroom to admire three-year-old Fatimas greeting her with a broad smile and a happy dance. Chhoti Mummy hugs the child and gestures to know if she has eaten breakfast. Fatima is deaf and mute. She has only recently been fitted with a cochlear implant, which has enabled her to hear and appreciate music to which she loves to dance. It is quite obvious that Sabahs favourite in the nursery is five-year-old Moosa, named by Mummy, Bilquis Edhi, herself, after her own youngest grandson, Sabah and Faisals youngest son Moosa. But this Moosa, even though he is five, doesnt look more than a year old. His growth is stunted. Sabah lifts him out of his cot and cuddles him lovingly. The nursery only has special children or children with learning disabilities. Moosa was the last child here named by Bilquis Edhi. The rest have been given names by their Chhoti Mummy. There are two newborn baby girls, Aimen and Noor Fatima, peacefully sleeping in their cradles in the cheerful blue nursery. Both the babies are blind. The moment some parents discover that all is not well with their babies they quietly leave them in our cot, says Sabah. They never return for them, she sighs. Parents of very sick children, too, disown them even when they know that their child doesnt have much time to live. We take them in, find them the best of medical care till the last of their breath, she adds. On discovering a child in the cot, we first try to get information about who left him or her there followed by a thorough medical check-up. If they are in need of medical care, we make sure that they receive the best that there is. Just the other day, someone left a little girl suffering from diarrhoea. She had to be hospitalised, she informs. Just then one little girl, of about four years of age, who also looks like she is considerably attached to her Chhoti Mummy walks in and runs up to her. She is normal. There is nothing wrong with this one, Sabah says. She says her name is Manahil. We found her near Sohrab Goth. Most of the children in our Sohrab Goth Centre are much older so I brought her here with me until we can find her parents, she informs. By the grace of God, there is no shortage of space, love and care in this Home built for these children by Edhi Sahab and Mummy, she says, kissing the childs head. All children are a blessing, a priceless gift from God. I wish the parents who discard their children like or neglect them would realise this. I wish such parents could love their special, disabled or sick children like they love their normal children, she says. Sometimes, these very children who they love so much because they are normal and healthy grow up to discard their parents when they are old and weak. Thats the story of so many old people in our homes, she concludes. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Documentary on Dr Aafia Siddiqui launched in Karachi
Description : KARACHI: Aafia Siddiqui  The True Story, a documentary by Friends of Aafia, was launched here at the Karachi Press Club (KPC) on Saturday. The documentary shed light on various aspects of the life of Dr Aafia from her birth, education, marriage and to her kidnapping in Karachi and confinement in a notorious US prison.
View this post on Instagram
Aafias sister Dr Fowzia Siddiqui and Muslim Matters Editor-in-chief Hena Zuberi and others spoke at the event. Dr Fowzia said that her sister Dr Aafia was a gifted child, a bright scholar and a loving and caring person. She got a PhD degree in neurosciences from Brandies University of the US and it was her dream to revolutionise education system in Pakistan. In the documentary, human rights lawyer Clive Stafford Smith, who currently represents Dr Aafia, said a vast majority of the American people had no idea who Dr Aafia was and they also did not care.
He said that she has suffered a lot in the US prison and braved all sorts of torture. El-Hajj Mauri Saalakhan, the founding president and director of operations at The Aafia Foundation, told the documentary makers that after 9/11, the US targeted the human rights and liberties of people, especially Muslims. He said Dr Aafia also fell prey to this victimisation and in 2003 she was kidnapped, along with her children, in Karachi and got disappeared on mere suspicion that her husband had bought online night vision goggles. Umme Muhammad, the president of the Musawemem Campaign, said for the last 15 years she had been linked to the case of Dr Aafia but disappointingly nothing more could be achieved.
She said Dr Aafia was targeted only because she was Muslim. Yvonne Ridley was amongst the first investigative journalists who told the world that Dr Aafia was jailed in Afghanistan. Talking about the grey lady prisoner of Bigram jail, she said in those times the US administration would dehumanise the prisoners and the same was done to Dr Aafia. She was wounded by the US soldiers and in injured condition she was brought to the US and tried by a court in a highly biased manner and jailed for long 86 years, which means the rest of her life. Zeina El-Debis, leader of the Friends of Aafia and founder of the Shade of Mercy Foundation, talked about their efforts to get Dr Aafia repatriated on humanitarian grounds. She said the documentary was also a part of such efforts. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Situationer: Riverine region in the crosshairs of militia violence
Description : DESPITE a year-long anti-dacoit operation in upper Sindhs riverine area, the dacoit factor remains an enigma for the provincial police. The situation took a new turn on May 5 when the Bugtis, allegedly backed by the Punjab police and equipped with military-grade weapons, infiltrated the riverine area of Rwanti in Ghotki, which lies on the Sindh-Punjab border, adding a new layer of complexity to the ongoing operation. The recent incident has once again laid bare the seeming helplessness of the Sindh police, sparking outrage among the provinces intelligentsia. The scourge of dacoits has long plagued parts of northern Sindh, with the governments efforts to eradicate them yielding little success. Despite continued endeavours to tackle the issue, the desired results remain elusive. The Kalpar Bugtis, led by their chief Jalal Kalpar Bugti, claimed to have exacted revenge for the murder of his 30-year-old son, Abdul Rehman Kalpar, by killing two prominent dacoits from the Shar community and injuring half a dozen others. The incident occurred in the Machhko police station area, which falls under the jurisdiction of the Punjab police. The dacoits killed were identified as Alim alias Almo Shar, brother of Sanu Shar, and Hakim alias Haku Shar. Rehman Kalpar was ambushed and killed by dacoits on Feb 13 while he was travelling on the CPEC road in Ghotki district. Jalal Kalpar reached out to the Sindh police, seeking their assistance in avenging his sons murder, according to a senior police officer familiar with the situation. Dacoit issue remains an enigma for Sindh police Jalal Kalpar is unapologetic and straightforward in justifying his actions. I repeatedly reached out to the Ghotki police, but they ignored me. I went to perform Umrah, and upon my return, I was approached by the Punjab police to liaise with them and see how things work, he told Dawn over phone from Sui in Balochistan.
Jalal alleged that Ghotki police SSP Anwar Khetran made excuses, claiming that his force was outgunned by the dacoits, as they only had G-3 and Kalashnikov rifles. However, he added, Mr Khetran did acknowledge that geo-fencing evidence had confirmed the involvement of the Shar community in his sons murder. Punjab police sought help from me in terms of human resource and police would lead the offensive. My men were there as a cover. Finally, Shars were killed in Machko police limits of Punjab. Sindh police didnt do anything in this offence, Jalal alleged. Jalal Kalpar hails from those Bugti families who defied the late Nawab Akbar Bugti and were subsequently displaced from Dera Bugti, settling in Sindh. Following Rehmans killing, Jalal declared at a jirga in Sui that he would hold accountable those responsible, specifically targeting Shaharyar Shar, the chieftain of the Shar clan and a former PTI leader who later joined PPP. In an attempt to defuse the situation, Shar reached out to Jalal to clarify his position and maintain neutrality. Jalal conveyed message to Shaharyar that if Abid Hussain Jatoi, Abid Sundrani, or Gul Mohammad Jakhrani stand surety for him, only then will he talk to him. Only Gul Mohammad agreed, and he, along with Shaharyar, met Kalpar at his Sukkur residence, but names of Rahib Khan Shar and Sana Shar emerged as those responsible for Rehmans murder, a police officer said. Police post as Bugtis base A former SSP of Ghotki said that before the May 5 incident, Bugtis had started arriving in areas along the Sindh-Punjab border. They [Bugtis] wanted Bhaya-4 police post vacated by Sindh police. This post is manned by Ghotki police, but the area falls in Punjabs territorial limits. As they wanted to use this post as their operational base, but didnt find Ghotki police forthcoming in their response, so they turned to Punjab police eventually, said the officer. According to him, the Punjab police permitted the Bugtis to utilise the Camp-2 location, which was situated approximately 800 metres from Sanu Shars hideout. Its an ideal location from which they can confront the Shars comfortably, the officer added. Viral video images revealed that the Bugtis, armed with prohibited and military-grade weapons, disembarked from APCs in the katcha area. The ensuing gun battle, which lasted a couple of days, resulted in the deaths of two Shars and injuries to several others. The Bugtis then departed. According to a former SSP of Shikarpur, the military-grade weapons used were of 82mm dimension, a type commonly seen in Afghanistan. Dangerous precedent Professor Inam Shaikh, an analyst, says, The incident has set a dangerous precedent. He urges the Supreme Court to take suo motu notice. How can state collaborate with private persons? It amounts to creating private militia which otherwise means civil war. Supreme Court must step in to take action against police authorities and criminals for this illegal act, he insists. Naseer Memon, a writer, has analysed the situation from the perspective of good dacoits, bad dacoits and the economy of the katcha area. The recent episode of allowing one tribe to attack another in the katcha area can snowball this crime into a tribal warfare. This can flare up a bloodbath, he says. He believes that a multi-stakeholder economy, operating behind the scenes, drives the dacoits, kidnapping, and ransom industry in upper Sindh. A police official reveals that Rahib Shar has been primarily responsible for the kidnapping of people on the CPEC road and other areas. Meanwhile, Sanu Shar has been running a honey trap industry in the riverine area. According to another police officer, Rahib Shar is residing in Sindhs riverine area, while Sanu Shar is based in Punjabs limits. Actually, there is a strip of riverine land stretching over around 3-4km that falls in Sindh but administratively looked after by Rahim Yar Khan administration. Since Punjab police dont pay heed to this area much and Sindh police also remain inactive, it has become a sort of no mans land and a safe haven for outlaws, claims an SSP from lower Sindh. Bugtis aim to target Shars as a community, while the actual culprits, Rahib Shar and Sanu Shar, remain out of their reach. After the July 28, 2023, killing of notorious dacoits Janu Indher, Soomar Shar, Shahzado Dashti, Nazar Mohammad alias Nazroo alias Kato Shar, and Mubashir alias Mushir Indhar, the Sindh police chief was initially reluctant to take a position. However, the Sindh police later claimed credit for the operation. Meanwhile, the Punjab police also staked their claim. Nevertheless, the Sindh police asserted their right to the head money of Rs8.5 million fixed by the government against Janu, Soomar, and Shahzado. After the Bugtis onslaught on the Shars, Sanu Shar uploaded a video clarifying that he was not involved in Rehmans murder. However, this failed to appease Jalal Kalpar, who has temporarily withdrawn from the area but remains resolute in his vow to take on the Shars until Rehmans murderers are killed. I have no issues with Sindh or the Sindhi people, nor did I have any enmity with the Shars as a community. It is the Ganderi Shars, specifically Sannu, Moriyo, Jamal, and Rahib, who are responsible for my sons murder. So, my quest for vengeance is far from over, he declared. Despite repeated messages and calls, Ghotki SSP Sumair Noor Channa remained unavailable to explain whether criminal cases have been lodged in this regard. Similarly, Rahim Yar Khan SSP Rizwan Gondal did not reply to questions about how Punjab police are backing private militias to take on outlaws. A message was also sent to Sindh IG Ghulam Nabi Memon to get his side of the story, but no contact could be established with him. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Pakistans iCube-Qamar beams back first images from moons orbit
Description : Pakistans inaugural lunar satellite iCube-Qamar on Friday transmitted the first-ever images captured by it from the lunar orbit, the national space agency said. The satellite, part of Chinas Change-6 lunar mission, was launched from the Hainan province on May 3 and had successfully entered the moons orbit at 1:14pm on May 8. The moon is at an average distance of 384,400km from earth. The lunar module was designed by Islamabads Institute of Space Technology (IST) in collaboration with Chinas Shanghai University (SJTU) and Pakistans national space agency Suparco. The landmark images were unveiled at a ceremony organised at the China National Space Agency (CNSA) to mark the successful mission accomplishment, IST spokesperson and head of Department of Electrical and Computer Science, Dr Khurram Khursheed told Dawn.com. They were officially handed over to Pakistans ambassador to Beijing, she added.
View this post on Instagram
One of the first-ever images captured by Pakistans inaugural lunar satellite iCube-Qamar shows the moon and the sun.   Suparco/CNSA
The iCube-Q orbiter carries two optical cameras to image the lunar surface. The module is a cube satellite or cubesat  miniature satellites typically characterised by their small size and standardized cubic design. Due to their compact size and relatively low cost compared to traditional satellites, CubeSats offered opportunities for universities, research institutions and commercial entities to participate in space missions and gather valuable data for scientific advancement and innovation. Operating in extreme temperatures as low as minus 100 degrees Celsius, the satellite features a 7-kilogramme one-megapixel camera tailored for missions with power constraints.
Dr Khursheed had said the satellite would play a critical role in deep space missions. Its surface-level analysis capabilities, transmitting images at a modest 1-kbps, will provide crucial data on crater locations, water, and traces of ice on the moons surface, he had said. As the Chinese lander collects rock and soil samples, iCube-Q will spend three to six months orbiting the moon, capturing and transmitting images of the moon back to Earth. The IST said the opportunity to release the cubesat in lunar orbit from the Change-6 mission was offered by the CNSA through the Asia Pacific Space Cooperation Organisation (Apsco). After a thorough evaluation, Pakistans proposal was accepted out of all Apsco member states.
One of the first-ever images captured by Pakistans inaugural lunar satellite iCube-Qamar shows the sun shining brightly.   Suparco/CNSA
The Change-6 mission, which aims to explore the moons dark side, employs lunar research payloads from multiple countries, including Pakistans iCube-Qamar satellite. The mission is named after the mythical Chinese moon goddess. Nasa is banned by US law from any collaboration, direct or indirect, with China. On Change-6, China is carrying payloads from France, Italy, Sweden and Pakistan, while Change-7 will bear payloads from Russia, Switzerland and Thailand when it launches in 2026.
Change-6 aims to collect around 2kg of lunar samples from the far side of the Moon and bring them back to Earth for analysis. Chinese state news agency Xinhua had hailed it as the first endeavour of its kind in the history of human lunar exploration. China will send a robotic spacecraft in the coming days on a round trip to the moons far side in the first of three technically demanding missions that will pave the way for an inaugural Chinese crewed landing and a base on the lunar south pole. The probe is set to land in the immense South Pole-Aitken Basin, one of the largest known impact craters in the solar system. Once there, it will scoop up lunar soil and rocks, and carry out other experiments in the landing zone. With no direct line of sight with the Earth, Change-6 must rely on a recently deployed relay satellite orbiting the moon during its 53-day mission, including a never-before-attempted ascent from the moons hidden side on its return journey home. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Ruling coalition loses 27 reserved seats in Punjab
Description :  Speaker suspends PML-Ns 23, PPPs two, and one member each of PML-Q, IPP
 Decision announced on point of order raised by PTI-backed SIC leader
 In National Assembly, ruling coalition also likely to lose 23 seats ahead of budget session LAHORE / ISLAMABAD: The ruling coalition in Punjab led by PML-N on Friday lost dozens of reserved seats in the provincial assembly when the speaker suspended 24 women and three minority MPAs elected on reserved seats and barred them from joining the house proceedings. Twenty-three of the suspended MPAs belonged to PML-N, two to PPP and one each to PML-Q and IPP. Speaker Malik Mohammad Ahmed Khan took the decision on a point of order raised a day ago by opposition lawmaker Rana Aftab of PTI-backed Sunni Ittehad Council (SIC) during the house proceedings. The opposition member had argued that the Supreme Court had suspended the decision of the Election Commission of Pakistan (ECP) of allocating the reserved seats of SIC to other parties on the plea that the SIC had neither contested elections nor had submitted a list of nominees for the seats reserved for women and minorities. But Speaker Khan ruled that he had sought opinions of the advocate general as well as the provincial law department and would take a decision only on receiving their reports. Soon after the beginning of house proceedings on Friday, the speaker read out the Supreme Court order and gave the ruling that Rana Aftabs point of order was lawful and suspended the 27 members immediately. When Mr Aftab pointed out that the suspended MPAs had unlawfully voted for the resolution condemning May 9 violence, the chair said he should have raised the issue when the resolution had been put to vote a day ago. The women MPAs suspended were Maqsoodan Bibi, Rubina Nazir, Salma Zahid, Kanwal Nauman, Zeba Ghafoor, Saeeda Samreen Taj, Sheharbano, Amna Parveen, Syed Sumera Ahmed, Uzma Butt, Afshan Hussain, Shagufta Faisal, Nasreen Riaz, Sajida Naveed, Farzana Abbas, Mariya Talal, Tasheen Fawad, Abida Bashir, Saeeda Muzaffar, Faiza Monima, Amera Khan, Samiya Ata, Rahat Afza and Rukhsana Shafiq. The minority MPAs were Tariq Masih Gill, Waseem Anjum, and Basroji. National Assembly After the Supreme Courts decision and the Punjab Assembly speakers action, the ruling coalition in the National Assembly is also set to lose nearly two dozen members ahead of the crucial budget session. President Asif Ali Zardari on Friday summoned the National Assembly session on Monday (May 13) and the SIC members are expected to seek a similar ruling from Speaker Ayaz Sadiq. After allocating reserved seats to the parties in the NA in proportion to the general seats won by them in the Feb 8 elections, the Election Commission of Pakistan (ECP) had withheld the notifications on 23 reserved seats  20 for women and three for minorities  due to the dispute on the allocation of the seats after the decision of the PTI-backed independents to join the SIC. Later, the ECP refused to allocate these seats to the SIC and issued notifications distributing these seats to the parties in the ruling coalition headed by the PML-N. The ECP allocated 15 seats reserved for women to the PML-N, four to PPP and one to the JUI-F. It allocated one seat each reserved for the minorities to the PML-N, the PPP and the MQM-P. As a result, PML-N became the largest party in the NA with 123 seats whereas the tallies of PPP and the JUI-F rose to 73 and 11, respectively. The ECP had also issued notifications on the reserved seats for women and minorities in Punjab and the KP assemblies the same day. The PML-N had initially won a total of 75 general seats and was joined by nine independents. With the allocation of 19 reserved seats for women and four reserved seats for minorities, the number reached 107. However, after the March 5 notifications, the PML-N had been allocated 15 out of the remaining 20 reserved seats for women and one out of the three remaining seats reserved for minorities, taking the partys tally to 123 seats. Likewise, PPP had won 54 general seats and was allocated 12 seats reserved for women and two for minorities. After the allocation of four more seats reserved for women and one for minorities on March 5, the number of the PPP lawmakers is now 73, still fewer than the PTI-backed independents who had joined the SIC hoping to get reserved seats. The MQM-Pakistan has 22 members in the National Assembly, while the number of JUI-F lawmakers had gone up to 11 from seven. The SC decision is expected to have no effect in the composition of the Balochistan Assembly as PTI had not won any seat in the province in the Feb 8 polls. However, in the provincial assembly of Sindh, the two reserved seats for women were given to PPP from the share of the PTI-SIC, which had nine members. KP Assembly The most interesting distribution of reserved seats had been observed in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Assembly, where the PTI-backed independents had won 91 seats compared to just 19 seats secured by all other political parties combined. However, the JUI-F, which could get only seven general seats to stay on top among these political parties, was allocated 10 reserved seats for women. Likewise, the PML-N, which won six general seats, was given eight reserved seats. The PPP, which bagged four general seats, was allocated six reserved seats. The ANP and the PTI-P, which clinched one general seat each, also remained lucky to have their numbers double in the provincial assembly. However, these MPAs in KP Assembly have not yet taken oath as the speaker has refused to call the session. Gwadar killings Meanwhile, the Punjab Assembly during its Fridays sitting adopted a resolution condemning the recent killing of 11 workers belonging to Punjab in Gwadar. The resolution presented by treasury members Amjad Ali Javed demanded the federal government arrest the culprits. It also demanded that the centre announce a compensation package for the heirs of the deceased. South Punjab On a point of order raised by opposition MPA Nadeem Qureshi, Punjab Finance Minister Mujtaba Shuja told the house that the south Punjab secretariat was not being wrapped up; rather the officers who had been promoted were being replaced by new appointments. The minister also rejected the stance that the PML-N was against the development of south Punjab and said that the region had been developed the most when incumbent Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif was the chief minister of Punjab. Published in Dawn, May 11th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : PIA staff forgets to put boys body on plane
Description :
SKARDU: Officials of PIA, the Civil Aviation Authority and police try to placate the protesting father of the deceased.Photo by the writer
GILGIT: In a heart-wrenching incident, a PIA flight from Islamabad to Skardu left behind the body of a six-year-old boy at the capitals airport on Friday, while his parents continued their journey, unaware of the shocking mistake. The parents of the deceased boy were shocked and fainted at Skardu airport when they came to know that their sons body had been left behind in Islamabad. Mujtaba, a resident of Katshi village of Kharmang district, was diagnosed with a tumour at a hospital in Skardu and doctors referred him to Rawalpindi for treatment a month ago. His father Muhammad Askari and mother took him to Rawalpindi and he had been under treatment at Benazir Bhutto Hospital for weeks. Mujtaba lost his life in the hospital on Thursday. The parents decided to transport the body of their child to their native village of Katshi for burial, through a PIA flight on Friday, as a 24-hour-long journey from Islamabad to Skardu by road with the body was not possible due to hot weather. Shocked parents, relatives protest against airline managements negligence at Skardu airport The deceased boys parents and another relative confirmed their tickets at flight PK-451 from Islamabad to Skardu on Friday morning. They brought the body to Islamabad airport at 6am and completed cargo procedure for the body after fulfilling SOPs and airlines rules and made the payment. Ibrahim Asadi, a relative of the deceased boy, told Dawn that the body was scheduled to be transported with the parents to Skardu from Islamabad at 9am. He said the flight was delayed for four hours and left Islamabad at 1pm. Upon arrival at Skardu airport at 2pm, the parents were informed that mistakenly the body was not loaded on the plane and left behind at Islamabad airport. The news sparked grief and outrage as parents were shocked and started crying while the boys mother and father fainted at the airport. The relatives of the boy waiting to receive the body also gathered at the airports lounge and started protest against the PIA managements negligence. It continued for three hours. Officials of PIA, Civil Aviation Authority and other departments, who were on duty at Skardu airport, tried to calm down the boys parents and relatives and admitted their mistake. They assured the parents of bringing back the body on Saturday (today). The PIA officials said the company, which handles cargos at the airport, is responsible for not loading the body and assured the parents that action would be taken against it for negligence. The boys parents and relatives chanted slogans against the PIA administration. They said the poor family had paid higher price to transport the body through the PIA flight, but the airline committed a serious negligence. They appealed to the government to take action against those responsible for the negligence. Yousaf Kamal, another relative of the deceased boy, said the body had deliberately not been loaded on the plane. He said Minister for Kashmir Affairs and Gilgit-Baltistan Engr Amir Muqam was scheduled to fly to Gilgit from Islamabad on Friday, adding that the PIA flight from Islamabad to Gilgit couldnt operate due to the bad weather condition. He said the federal minister had changed his plan and decided to go to Skardu and kept the passengers waiting. He said the flight was scheduled to depart from Islamabad at 9am, but was delayed till 1pm to accommodate the minister, leaving the body behind at the airport. Published in Dawn, May 11th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Pakistan remain unbeaten in Azlan Shah Cup as match with New Zealand ends in tie
Description : Pakistan on Friday secured a tie in their match against New Zealand in the 30th Azlan Shah Hockey Cup. Pakistans fifth match today, which was played in Malaysias Ipoh city at 1pm (PKT), saw them remain unbeaten throughout the tournament. The match ended in a draw, with both teams securing one point each, the Pakistan Hockey Federation (PHF) said.
View this post on Instagram
Senior player Ammad Shakeel is leading the 18-member squad with Abu Bakr as the vice-captain. Japan lead the points table with 13 points while Pakistan rank second with 11 points. New Zealand hold the third position with seven points while Malaysia follow them with a point less.
View this post on Instagram
According to the PHF, both Pakistan and New Zealand had not scored by half-time. New Zealand then succeeded in scoring a field goal in the 35th minute of the game. However, Abu Bakr amassed a goal for Pakistan in the 43rd minute while playing at the penalty corner. Pakistan and Japan had already qualified for the final match, which will take place at 5:30pm (PKT) on Saturday at the Azlan Shah Stadium in Ipoh, after winning their respective matches on Wednesday. Pakistan had defeated Canada 5-4 while Japan beat hosts Malaysia 2-1. According to Radio Pakistan, Pakistan have won their three matches against Malaysia, South Korea and Canada while the ones against Japan and New Zealand ended in a draw. Meanwhile, after their 3-1 victory against Canada today, Japan have four wins plus a draw. Earlier this month, head coach Roelant Oltmans had said he expected an improved show by Pakistan in the tournament. Oltmans, 69, has served Pakistans senior and junior teams in different roles since 2004 and was involved with the youth side in his most recent stint. Pakistan won the Azlan Shah Cup title thrice  in 1999, 2000 and 2003  and came third in the last edition which was also held in Ipoh in 2022. Malaysia are the defending champions of this years edition. Addressing the squad via video link, Information Minister Attaullah Tarar reiterated the governments commitment to hockey while also mentioning a campaign across all forms of media to highlight the teams achievements in the Azlan Shah Cup, according to a report from state-run Radio Pakistan. He added that the prime minister would focus on removing obstacles in the development of hockey in Pakistan. Tara said final would be broadcast nationwide tomorrow on Saturday and wished the team luck. The entire nation is praying for the victory of Pakistan and is looking forward to welcome a champion team. Rana Mashood Ahmed, chairman of the Prime Ministers Youth Programme, also congratulated the team for reaching the final after thirteen years. He added that Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif would also host the team on its return and address issues impeding hockeys development in the country. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Who can rock the hybrid boat?
Description : A NUMBER of developments over the past week suggest that the establishment is keen to enforce/ maintain the status quo and the only impediment in its path may be an assertive superior judiciary that has been increasingly finding its feet in recent weeks. If jailed PTI leader and former prime minister Imran Khans article in UKs conservative right-wing Telegraph newspaper blaming the military leadership directly for all his woes the week before was not hint enough of the state of play, two public statements by the latter clarified issues rather unambiguously. The first came in the DG ISPRs press briefing, which was ostensibly called to discuss Afghanistan-based terrorist groups involvement in attacks on Chinese nationals working on development projects in the country. But in response to a couple of questions about the PTI and Imran Khan related to the events of May 9 last year, the DG ISPR stated unequivocally that the only path to rehabilitation for the political party and its leaders was to seek forgiveness for attacking your own forces.
Then, perhaps, talks could happen and that too with political parties (ie, the government), as the military had nothing to do with politics. Imran Khan has been consistent in saying he wouldnt talk to the powerless political parties and that a meaningful dialogue is possible only with the military. The DG ISPR also lamented the delay in the prosecution and sentencing of all those responsible for the May mayhem  including the leaders and mastermind against whom irrefutable evidence has been gathered and submitted  and, in doing so, appeared to hint at the establishments frustrations with what it perceives as roadblocks being erected by the judiciary. The content of the live presser evoked an equally adamant response from the PTI, which went on the offensive, reiterating its stance that May 9 was a false flag operation, accusing the militarys spokesman of being economical with the truth, and saying it would be happy to live with the findings of an impartial judicial commission into the May 9 events and would even apologise if found to be at fault. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. The military spokesman had pre-empted this demand in his briefing earlier by saying if a probe were to happen, as was being demanded, it ought to start with 2014, and not nine years later. The 2014 PTI sit-in in the federal capital was said to have been instigated and backed by the then ISI chief. This was the first indication that the military was prepared to hold its own accountable for past follies, if it paved the way for the trials and sentencing of PTI leaders it says were responsible for the attacks on defence installations in a number of cities in Punjab and KP. While the spokesman left nothing to the imagination, on the first anniversary of May 9, the army chief added his voice to his chief spokesmans in terms of stressing the need for punishing the perpetrators of the violence a year earlier, also lashing out against what he called digital terrorism.
This indicates that harsher curbs on social media are planned. So far, the PTI has had overwhelming social media dominance and had been able to keep a step ahead of its adversaries, but we will find out soon whether it has what it takes to bypass software the Chinese have developed over the years (and Pakistan has reportedly acquired) and successfully used to block dissident content. With this ever-widening gulf between the establishment and the party it once saw as a panacea for all that ails Pakistan, the one thing that many felt could force a rethink in the establishment would have been a public manifestation of the immense support enjoyed by the PTI, as evidenced in last Februarys elections. Many Pakistan watchers keenly waited all day for multitudes of PTI supporters to spill out onto the roads and streets of major urban conurbations on the party leaders call to break the shackles and protest on May 9. But the brutal crackdown of the past one year seems to have knocked the wind out of the partys sails and worn down the workers will. People may turn out to vote for it in droves, but did not appear prepared to risk life, limb and liberty in coming out for mass protests. Some small localised protests did happen, but had zero impact in the sense of influencing decision-making in the corridors of power. Going forward, a couple of factors will play a role in steering developments. The first and foremost will be the confidence the army chief has in his control over his institution. His predecessor appointed a dozen major generals to three stars in his final six weeks in office and left the incumbent little room in terms of forming his own team. Natural attrition and the more dramatic exit of a couple of three stars on disciplinary grounds recently has, 18 months down the line, given the chief an opportunity to place senior officers of his own choosing in key roles which will give him greater freedom of action both inside and outside the institution. The promotion of three officers this week, including the DG ISPR, to three stars was another step in that direction. The military saw May 9 as a coup against the chief, a failed attempt to dislodge him from office. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. With the PTI protests failing to gather momentum, the only impediment in his path seems to be an increasingly assertive superior judiciary. It can and will, in all likelihood, challenge the establishments pre-eminence in decision-making. It isnt clear how the latter plans to deal with that, especially because it believes that a direly needed economic revival is only possible under the umbrella of a hybrid set-up and in a relatively calm political environment. Only the judiciary can rock its boat now. The writer is a former editor of Dawn. abbas.nasir@hotmail.com Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Insurgency and social change
Description : THE recent killing of seven barbershop workers from Punjab in Gwadar is another indicator that the insurgency in Balochistan is evolving and intensifying demographic changes, which will impact the sociopolitical landscape of the province. Although targeted killings of settlers in Balochistan are not a new trend, the emergence of the Balochistan Liberation Army as the primary insurgent group has significantly increased operational capacities and diversified targets.
While the BLA has not officially claimed responsibility for the Gwadar attack, it is likely the act of one of its wings or affiliate groups. Last month, the group carried out a significant attack, killing nine people from central Punjab who were planning on reaching Europe through Iran. Based on their ethnicity, BLA gunmen abducted them from a bus bound for Taftan and later dumped their bodies under a bridge in a hilly area of Noshki. In a similar attack, possibly by the same gunmen, two people were killed when they tried to escape the assailants cordon on N-40, the Quetta-Noshki highway. Following the Noshki attack, the BLA issued a statement claiming that its special squad had killed agents of Pakistans intelligence agencies who, they claimed, were travelling in plain clothes on the bus. However, media reports and investigations later revealed that the victims were using the Balochistan route to travel to Iran and onward to Europe. Baloch militants view workers and travellers from Punjab as collaborators or agents of security forces or the federal government. Attacks targeting Punjabi workers and settlers have occurred in various parts of the province in the past. It appears that the insurgents kill settlers because they are non-combatants and, as such, easy targets. Militant groups assign such tasks to their new recruits to test their conviction and draw them into the cycle of violence. While one can comprehend Baloch grievances against the state institutions and Punjab, it is also crucial to understand why they target non-combatants who have been serving them for years. Whenever anger flares against the states flawed policies, settlers become the targets. Traditionally, Baloch society has a few key professions. Hairdressing is one of the major ones they miss. Teaching comes next, with teachers from Punjab and the Urdu-speaking community making significant contributions to the education sector in the province. Like tribal codes in other parts of the country, the Baloch follow the tradition of hosting members of different ethnicities without integrating them into their tribal ethics. This is a common practice, as assimilation is a long process. The same applies to settlers from Punjab and urban Sindh, who have embraced the norms of Baloch society, while maintaining ties with their native towns and communities.
However, Punjabis constitute the largest ethnic group in the country and wield significant power and resources, leading to resentment not only among the Baloch, but also Pakhtuns and Sindhis. Whenever anger flares against the establishment and the states flawed policies, settlers become the targets of this animosity. Historically, barbers have been the first victims when such hatred triggers violence. It is worth noting that many of these barbers hail from southern Punjab, much of which identifies itself as Baloch, but their official domicile determines their identity and ethnicity. Over the last two decades, Pakhtuns have captured market businesses in urban Balochistan, while Sindhis have gradually become prominent in the labour market. Despite issues of ethnic and tribal pride and sociocultural differences, there has been no hostility towards these communities. This is because both ethnicities are part of Balochistan and share some cultural commonalities. Moreover, both communities have faced major hostility, apart from minor issues related to ethnic and tribal pride and sociocultural differences. The reasons are that both ethnicities are part of Balochistan and share few other cultural commonalities, but both are also seen as deprived communities and, in the past, have remained part of the political struggle for rights. Insurgencies have no room for neutrality or ambiguity, as insurgents seek clear distinctions between friends and foes. In places like Myanmar and India, ethnic insurgents target civilians from minority ethnic groups, as well as engage in property destruction and other abuses. While small ethnic groups may strive to maintain a neutral stance, they often find themselves between insurgents and counterinsurgents in grey areas. This dynamic is evident among Pakhtuns and Sindhis, who have been targeted by insurgents while working on government projects. The contractors had hired them as an alternative to Punjabi labour, but they were not spared despite a sense of affinity with them.
Sociopolitical transformation is a complex phenomenon, which is influenced not only by insurgents but also by internal societal changes. Baloch society is transforming due to rural-to-urban migration, increasing literacy rates, and improved connectivity. Similar to Karachis experience, urbanisation in Quetta is making other major urban centres multi-ethnic too. Despite ethnic bonds with Sindhis, coexistence with Pakhtuns and Sindhis may face occasional challenges. Additionally, religion presents a growing challenge, as religious fervour increases alongside literacy rates among the Baloch. While this may appear advantageous for state institutions seeking cohesion through religion, religiosity has not weakened Balochistans nationalistic sentiments. The promotion of religious organisations and madressahs by state institutions has failed to make a significant impact, mainly due to the vast disparities within Baloch societys tribal, rural, and urban composition, which foster diverse political interests. The very forces undermining peace are now major power players. At the national level, the provinces poor human development and governance indicators leave ample space for resistance politics. Sociopolitical changes often trigger paradoxical sentiments, with simultaneous pro-development and anti-development attitudes emerging. When the sense of deprivation intensifies, and resource distribution becomes contentious, it creates a conducive environment for militants to recruit, expand, and diversify their targets and tactics. Targeting non-combatants of the majority group reflects a deepening societal anger at this level. This is the most crucial level, as the state has to rethink and correct its approach towards Balochistan. The writer is a security analyst. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Indian elections
Description : THE Islamophobic rhetoric being employed by Narendra Modi for this election campaign has become shrill. Pakistan has nearly always been an electoral issue in India. However, this time, it is Indian Muslims who are bearing the brunt of the Indian prime ministers hate speech. Speaking in Rajasthan last month, he called Muslims infiltrators and said they produce too many children. In Gujarat, where, as chief minister, he had overseen the massacre of Muslims in 2002, he accused the Congress of seeking to loot Indias wealth and redistribute it among Muslims, and of organising a vote jihad against his leadership. Later, he accused the Congress and Muslims of stealing Hindu wealth and property.
Modis inflammatory rhetoric was followed by the BJPs campaign video portraying Muslims as outsiders who plundered Indias wealth. As concerns grew about communal violence, the video was removed. These allegations are a sequel to Modis public referencing of earlier conspiracy theories of love jihad (Muslims forcibly converting Hindu women and marrying them to increase the Muslim population) or land jihad (capturing land to construct religious structures and gaining control of Indias territory). Concerns that his rhetoric might incite further violence against Indian Muslims are increasing. Ordinarily, since Hindus are in a majority in India, it may be difficult to question the rationale of creating a Hindu state. However, two observations are in order. One, the expansionist designs of the cherished Hindu state seek the creation of an Akhand Bharat, a Hindu right fantasy, which would violate the territorial integrity of Nepal, Bangladesh, Pakistan, and Afghanistan, as per a map displayed in the new parliament building. This is not acceptable to the aforementioned independent states. Two, though the creation of a Hindu state should not translate into discrimination against minorities, regrettably this will be the case. The works of French political scientist Christophe Jaffrelot illustrate how Muslims, 14.5 per cent of Indias population, are grossly underrepresented in bureaucracy, the judiciary, police, and legislative organs. They are second-class citizens.
The Muslim-majority area of Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmiri is also being subjected to demographic engineering. The destruction of the centuries-old Babri Masjid by Hindu zealots in 1992 and the construction of a temple in its place has set a precedent that might be followed for other historic mosques. This contrasts sharply with the UAEs gesture of permitting a Hindu temple in Abu Dhabi. Modis anti-Muslim rhetoric is raising concerns of violence. Analysts are also pointing out the fascist tendencies of the BJP regime, a steep decline in democratic values, and a departure from the moorings of pluralism and secularism on which modern India was founded. In her book The Incarcerations, Alpa Shah contends that Modis India is using its national security apparatus to incarcerate ordinary citizens for their dissenting views. Commenting on the book, Arundhati Roy stated that this was about criminalisation and incarceration of dissent itself. Strikingly, the Modi regime has also used art and culture to project the Hindutva philosophy. Kunal Purohits book H-Pop: The Secretive World of Hindutva Pop Stars shows how Hindutva pop stars and influencers are being used to spread the message of Hindu supremacy and create acceptance of Hindutvas core beliefs. Apart from this, Modi is playing on his governments accomplishments: making India the worlds fifth largest economy; the construction of 50,000 kilometres of national highways; boosting Indias military spending; building Vikrant, Indias first domestically built aircraft carrier; and the Chandrayaan-3 moon landing. His prospects of winning a third term have been bolstered by a weak opposition. Despite the formation of the Congress-led 37-party INDIA coalition, there is no real challenge. What has bolstered his outreach is Indias enhanced global standing. In his book Why Bharat Matters, S. Jaishankar presents India as a leader of the global south and makes a case for the rejuvenation of India as a civilisational state.
There are some lessons that Pakistan could learn from Indias electoral process. One, despite the large scale of Indias elections (969 million registered voters; 1m polling stations) and the use of electronic voting machines, election results are largely accepted without much ado. Two, there is no caretaker government, as the incumbents become caretakers in a way, and refrain from announcing major policy decisions or sanctioning expenditure for development schemes. If Modi wins a third term, he is likely to maintain his pro-Hindutva, anti-Muslim, and hegemonic attitude towards regional countries, particularly Pakistan. The write is a former foreign secretary and chairman of Sanober Institute Islamabad. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Overflowing cups
Description : ON my travels in the last two years I noticed a new accessory: large water bottles. You know the ones with the straw protruding from its top? The most coveted one at the moment is the one which retails for around $45  which is roughly Rs12,000, but sells for Rs18,000 in some Karachi markets. This water bottle is a reminder of how our overconsumption is exacerbating the climate crisis. Despite all the evidence, it doesnt feel like a climate crisis when you look at our tendency to buy more  of everything. Plenty has been written about how bulk buying of clothes has accelerated fast fashion culture. These fast-moving trends have a devastating impact on the climate, from labour abuse in the garment industry to microfibres polluting Earth and water. The fashion industry is estimated to be responsible for 10 per cent of global carbon emissions, according to a 2020 report by the European Parliament. Although fashion houses will use terms like sustainable practices, only 1pc of used clothing is recycled into new clothes. The global textile production has doubled from 58 million tonnes in 2010 and is expected to grow to 145m tonnes by 2030, says the European Environment Agency. This is great news for world economies, except that it takes 200 years for some materials to decompose: synthetic fabrics like polyester, for example, break down into small plastic particles which last forever. This should horrify us, but one look at women lining up to buy the new XYZ designer lawn collection across Pakistan proves weve not grasped the severity of the climate crisis. Or care about it. I can sympathise with this, having heard people say how despondent they feel about the state of the  well, state; how change doesnt seem likely, so why care about the environment. My students, however, care very much about the environment, more than politicians do; they are inheriting a planet deluged in waste. But as valiant a generation this Z is proving  defying universitys bullying tactics for example  they are, according to studies, also the most likely to be influenced. Earlier, there was value attached to things and a sensibility too. Against this backdrop, whats the harm in buying a stainless steel cup which comes with a lifetime guarantee? Because it does not stop at one cup. You only have to go to TikTok to see the cupboards lined up with up to 37 different coloured cups of a single brand. People line up outside stores to buy the new release, there are sites dedicated to selling them. This particular company, which catered to blue collar workers in the US, has gone from earning $73m in 2019 to $750m last year, according to Vox. The companys claim, that it can keep cold drinks cold for 11 hours and hot drinks hot for seven hours, received an unlikely boost when, last year, a womans cup survived a car fire. The woman posted a Tik Tok (of course) of her burned-to-a-shell car, but the cup remained in its cup holder, and she rattled it to show the ice was still in it. This was marketing gold for the company, which bought the lady a new car and cup. It is this kind of marketing which adds to a products status and makes it more desirable. And causes a lot of problems for the environment. According to a story in the New York Times, producing one stainless steel water bottle was far more environmentally damaging than producing a plastic bottle. I recognise Im being more judgemental than usual, and while I am loathe to shame people for their choices, Im bothered by what these cups are selling  health as a status symbol. As Vox pointed out, people leave comments saying they are hydrated because of such cups. This idea extends to other wellness products: if you buy these clothes or these classes, you will unlock a better, healthier version of yourself, writes Vox. Health and hydration, like skin care, supplements, yoga pants etc, are part of a self-care trend that only fuels fast capitalism. Our elders were not immune to material acquisition, but there was value attached to things and a sensibility too. Clothes were upcycled, passed onto younger children, handed down as heirlooms even.  Today, it is easy to buy goods from the comfort of your phone, but it is not quenching our desire to want more. This desire is not helping our well-being, because retail therapy, as Time wrote last month, is tanking your mental health. How do we return to a time of stretching the shelf life of things, reusing, recycling, taming the beast in us that wants more irrespective of whether we need it? Simply by buying less, we will see a reduction in emissions and pollution. This is the goal we need to practise and teach our children as their future is at stake.  The writer is an instructor of journalism.  X: LedeingLady Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Areas of cooperation with Saudi Arabia identified: PM Shehbaz
Description : PRIME Minister Shehbaz Sharif has termed Pakistans recent diplomatic deliberations with Saudi Arabia great progress, Geo News reported. In an interview with Arab news channel Al Arabiya English, the premier said, We have identified areas of mutual cooperation, both at the government-to-government and business-to-business levels and that have been clearly identified. We now have a clear-cut way forward. The PM highlighted that both countries would work on mutual cooperation and investments in the field of mines and minerals as well as renewable energy, among other fields. The interview comes days after a Saudi investors delegation visited Pakistan.
The premier spoke about his maiden visit to the kingdom after starting his new term as the countrys chief executive. He also mentioned the visits made by the Saudi government and business delegations to strengthen diplomatic and trade ties between the two nations. PM Shehbaz said his meetings with Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed Bin Salman were positive. In response to a question, the premier termed the recent Pak-Saudi investment conference very productive and fruitful. While sharing details of his vision for economic stability, the PM mentioned his recent visit to the kingdom to attend the World Economic Forum meetings in which the discussions revolved around increasing agricultural production in Pakistan with the help of modern equipment and technology. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Bednarek storms to 200m triumph in Doha, Neeraj Chopra falls short
Description : DOHA: Kenneth Bednarek sounded out a warning to his Olympic rivals with a personal best and world-leading time in the 200 metres when he led an all-American podium at the Diamond League meeting in windy conditions in Doha on Friday. Wearing a headband with the words  Fear no one, Bednarek was in lane seven but the Tokyo Olympics silver medallist stormed to the finish line with a time of 19.67 seconds. Courtney Lindsey finished second (20.01), while Kyree King (20.21) was third. The best I can do this year is gold medal in the Olympics... I know I have the talent and good training. Running this fast this early is really good, it means I will be fast by the time we start the Olympics, Bednarek said. In the womens 100 metres, Britains Daryll Neita edged ahead of American Tamari Davis in the final 15 metres to win by one-hundredth of a second in a photo finish for the podium. Neita won with a time of 10.98 while American Celera Barnes was third (11.02). But it was Alison dos Santos who got the crowd going when he broke the meet record in the 400m hurdles as the towering Brazilian left his opponents far behind to clock 46.86 seconds. In the mens long jump, Greeces reigning Olympic champion Miltiadis Tentoglou finished second behind Jamaicas Carey McLeod who won with a leap of 8.52 metres thanks to a strong tailwind. Tentoglou, who was competing in his first event this year, could only manage 8.36 on his final attempt. Indias Olympic champion Neeraj Chopra was pipped to top spot in the javelin by the Czech Republics Jakub Vadlejch in a close contest where the pair were separated by just two centimetres. Chopra was looking to beat Vadlejchs best throw of 88.38 metres but his final effort fell agonisingly short as the two athletes smiled and shook hands. Elsewhere, Tokyo 2020 gold medallist Steven Gardiner said he was  just where I wanted to be after a dominant 400m win at Qatar Sports Club Stadium. And Kenyan world title-holder Mary Moraa held off Britains Jemma Reekie to win the womens 800m by half a second in 1:57.91, her seasons best. Kenyas Brian Komen came out narrowly ahead of compatriots Timothy Cheruiyot  the former world champion and Tokyo 2020 silver-medallist  and Reynold Kipkorir Cheruiyot with 3:32.43 in the mens 1,500m. In the womens pole vault, Britains world indoor champion Molly Caudery won on countback against reigning world champion Nina Kennedy of Australia after they both cleared 4.73. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Second night of auroras seen amid extreme solar storm
Description : Auroras lit up skies across swaths of the planet for the second night in a row on Saturday, after already dazzling Earthlings from the United States to Tasmania to the Bahamas the day before. A powerful solar storm  which could continue into Sunday  has triggered spectacular celestial shows usually confined to the far northern reaches of the planet, hence their nickname of the northern lights. I have the sensation of living through a historic night in France [] It was really charged, with solar particles and emotions, Eric Lagadec, an astrophysicist at the Observatoire de Cote dAzur, wrote on social media after the first night. Find good spots, away from the lights, with a clear view to the north! Late on Saturday evening, pictures again started trickling onto social media as people in the United States reported sightings, though not as strong as Friday nights. The first of several coronal mass ejections (CMEs)  expulsions of plasma and magnetic fields from the Sun   came just after 4pm GMT on Friday, according to the US-based National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)s Space Weather Prediction Center (SWPC). It was later upgraded to an extreme geomagnetic storm   the first since the Halloween Storms of October 2003 that caused blackouts in Sweden and damaged power infrastructure in South Africa. Fridays storm was listed as hitting level five geomagnetic conditions  the highest on the scale. Saturday saw G3 to G5 conditions, with G4 or higher conditions predicted Sunday and G3 conditions possible into Monday. But no major disruptions to power or communications networks appear to have been reported this time around, despite initial worries from authorities. There have only been preliminary reports of power grid irregularities, degradation to high-frequency communications, GPS and possibly satellite navigation, the SWPC said. Elon Musk, whose Starlink satellite internet operator has some 5,000 satellites in low Earth orbit, said his satellites were under a lot of pressure, but holding up so far. However Chinas National Centre for Space Weather issued a red alert on Saturday morning, warning the storm will impact communications and navigation in most areas of the country, state news agency Xinhua reported. Auroras were visible in the northern half of the country, according to media reports. Excitement over the phenomenon   and otherworldly photos of pink, green and purple night skies   popped up across the world, from Mont Saint-Michel on the French coast to Payette, Idaho  in the western United States  to Australias island state of Tasmania.
People pose for photos as a geomagnetic storm lights up the night sky above the Bonneville Salt Flats on May 10 in Wendover, Utah.  AFP
Unlike solar flares, which travel at the speed of light and reach Earth in around eight minutes, CMEs travel at a more sedate pace, with officials putting the current average at 800 kilometres per second. The CMEs emanated from a massive sunspot cluster that is 17 times wider than our planet. People with eclipse glasses can also look for the sunspot cluster during the day. The Sun is approaching the peak of an 11-year cycle that brings heightened activity. NOAAs Brent Gordon encouraged the public to try to capture the night sky with phone cameras even if they couldnt see auroras with their naked eyes. Youd be amazed at what you see in that picture versus what you see with your eyes. Fluctuating magnetic fields associated with geomagnetic storms induce currents in long wires, including power lines, which can potentially lead to blackouts. Long pipelines can also become electrified, leading to engineering problems. Spacecraft are also at risk from high doses of radiation, although the atmosphere prevents this from reaching Earth. NASA has a dedicated team looking into astronaut safety and can ask astronauts on the International Space Station to move to places within the outpost that are better shielded. Even pigeons and other species that have internal biological compasses could be affected. Pigeon handlers have noted a reduction in birds coming home during geomagnetic storms, according to NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The most powerful geomagnetic storm in recorded history, known as the Carrington Event after British astronomer Richard Carrington, occurred in September 1859. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Pakistans iCube-Qamar beams back first images from moons orbit
Description : Pakistans inaugural lunar satellite iCube-Qamar on Friday transmitted the first-ever images captured by it from the lunar orbit, the national space agency said. The satellite, part of Chinas Change-6 lunar mission, was launched from the Hainan province on May 3 and had successfully entered the moons orbit at 1:14pm on May 8. The moon is at an average distance of 384,400km from earth. The lunar module was designed by Islamabads Institute of Space Technology (IST) in collaboration with Chinas Shanghai University (SJTU) and Pakistans national space agency Suparco. The landmark images were unveiled at a ceremony organised at the China National Space Agency (CNSA) to mark the successful mission accomplishment, IST spokesperson and head of Department of Electrical and Computer Science, Dr Khurram Khursheed told Dawn.com. They were officially handed over to Pakistans ambassador to Beijing, she added.
View this post on Instagram
One of the first-ever images captured by Pakistans inaugural lunar satellite iCube-Qamar shows the moon and the sun.   Suparco/CNSA
The iCube-Q orbiter carries two optical cameras to image the lunar surface. The module is a cube satellite or cubesat  miniature satellites typically characterised by their small size and standardized cubic design. Due to their compact size and relatively low cost compared to traditional satellites, CubeSats offered opportunities for universities, research institutions and commercial entities to participate in space missions and gather valuable data for scientific advancement and innovation. Operating in extreme temperatures as low as minus 100 degrees Celsius, the satellite features a 7-kilogramme one-megapixel camera tailored for missions with power constraints.
Dr Khursheed had said the satellite would play a critical role in deep space missions. Its surface-level analysis capabilities, transmitting images at a modest 1-kbps, will provide crucial data on crater locations, water, and traces of ice on the moons surface, he had said. As the Chinese lander collects rock and soil samples, iCube-Q will spend three to six months orbiting the moon, capturing and transmitting images of the moon back to Earth. The IST said the opportunity to release the cubesat in lunar orbit from the Change-6 mission was offered by the CNSA through the Asia Pacific Space Cooperation Organisation (Apsco). After a thorough evaluation, Pakistans proposal was accepted out of all Apsco member states.
One of the first-ever images captured by Pakistans inaugural lunar satellite iCube-Qamar shows the sun shining brightly.   Suparco/CNSA
The Change-6 mission, which aims to explore the moons dark side, employs lunar research payloads from multiple countries, including Pakistans iCube-Qamar satellite. The mission is named after the mythical Chinese moon goddess. Nasa is banned by US law from any collaboration, direct or indirect, with China. On Change-6, China is carrying payloads from France, Italy, Sweden and Pakistan, while Change-7 will bear payloads from Russia, Switzerland and Thailand when it launches in 2026.
Change-6 aims to collect around 2kg of lunar samples from the far side of the Moon and bring them back to Earth for analysis. Chinese state news agency Xinhua had hailed it as the first endeavour of its kind in the history of human lunar exploration. China will send a robotic spacecraft in the coming days on a round trip to the moons far side in the first of three technically demanding missions that will pave the way for an inaugural Chinese crewed landing and a base on the lunar south pole. The probe is set to land in the immense South Pole-Aitken Basin, one of the largest known impact craters in the solar system. Once there, it will scoop up lunar soil and rocks, and carry out other experiments in the landing zone. With no direct line of sight with the Earth, Change-6 must rely on a recently deployed relay satellite orbiting the moon during its 53-day mission, including a never-before-attempted ascent from the moons hidden side on its return journey home. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : STYLE; ALL ABOUT MY MOTHER
Description :   An interview with designers Farah Talib Aziz and Maliha Aziz  the mother-daughter duo headlining the eponymous Farah Talib Aziz FTA label  could very well simply be a fashion feature. From a small business helmed by Farah from the basement of her home to the present day, when it is one of the countrys most coveted bridal brands as well as a titan in the lawn market, the story of FTAs rise could be a case study in the business of fashion. But it is also a human story  of how a woman, who was passionate about creating clothes, decided to make it her career when her eldest son left for university abroad. And then how, eventually, her younger daughter and son joined in, designing and strategising and expanding and advertising, until the FTA stores were packed choc-a-bloc with customers on a daily basis. It is a story about the business of fashion, yes, but it also fits like a glove into the theme of Mothers Day being celebrated today. And so, I sit across from Farah Talib Aziz and Maliha Aziz at the FTA flagship store in Karachis Phase 8 DHA commercial zone.  Dressed head-to-toe in FTA formal wear, theyre the classic interviewees for Mothers Day  finishing each others sentences, reminiscing over the same memories, growing older together and also, working together.  Their mutual passion for design binds Farah Talib Aziz and Maliha Aziz together, as does their love for each other.In the case of this particular mother-daughter power pair,we could perhaps also label them number one boss and employee Farah may have created the label 25-odd years ago but Maliha has also, for many years now, been very much the face of the brand, actively involved in the designing process, interacting regularly with the media, and enthusiastically outlining details of every new collection and campaign. Its a partnership that has worked wonders. Ive been in this space several times before and I am not exaggerating when I say that it has always been crowded. Its always shaadi season or Eid season or I-want-to-splurge-out-on-new-clothes season in Karachis it circles, and the ladies that dominate it tend to be FTA aficionados.  Today, for once, the bridal studio on the first floor where we sit is empty although, by the time we wrap up, I realise that customers have been waiting patiently on another floor for the interview to be over. Would your business have grown as much had you not been joined in it by your children, I ask Farah. No, she replies immediately. I have worked very hard, but there are so many different aspects of this work that are now divided between me and my children.  I have always been very vigilant about quality control, scrutinising every design and watching out for errors. But now, the brand extends over so many different genres of design, from bespoke bridals to ready-to-wear to unstitched lawn. It would be difficult to keep an eye on everything if I didnt have my children helping out. If I am ever occupied with one particular thing, I know that I can delegate the rest of my duties to Maliha and Umar [her son, Umar Aziz] and trust them completely. Mom isnt very business savvy, says Maliha. Her strength lies in the creative aspect of design, so it helps that she has people that she trusts working with her. Farah adds, I was very happy functioning from my homes basement. It was Maliha who kept pushing me to expand and diversify. Maliha nods. My mom would keep telling me not to take on too much responsibility by opening a store. I told her that we wouldnt know whether we could manage it unless we gave it a try. Eventually I convinced her to set up an additional workshop. From there, we expanded to a retail store in Karachis E Street, one in Lahore, the studio in DHA Karachi and, most recently, a store in Houston [in the US].   And for the longest time I didnt want to delve into lawn! Farah laughs. My first-ever lawn was created in collaboration with the Lakhany Silk Mills (LSM) group and they had approached me several times and I had refused. Maliha, however, was persistent. I remember that she had just got married at the time and was leaving for a trip abroad. Once she came back, she really got to work on the lawn. It was such a challenge, Maliha says, and it continues to be that way. How do you come up with a design that appeals to someone who is 16, as well as someone who is 60? From the colour to the embroidery patterns, to the print on the dupatta to the materials used  every detail has to be looked into! And we cant even utilise our most popular colours from a year ago, because then customers will think that we have got repetitive. Farah adds, We also have to keep the prices competitive, which is increasingly difficult, because raw materials and the manufacturing process have become so expensive. Was Maliha always inspired by her mothers creative streak?  Always! says Maliha. I remember when we used to go for vacations to the US when we were young, my mother would buy dresses for me and even bedsheets and use them as samples when we got home. A lot of international brands werent available in Pakistan at the time, and so my mum would recreate the designs on her own, adding frills to the bedsheets and stitching pillows. She would also create similar clothes for me. Farah says, I have always loved Eid and I would lay out new bedsheets in all the bedrooms on Eid day. I know how to cut, stitch and embroider, and I would create festive ghararas and shalwar qameez for Maliha. Id add cancans to her frocks and really doll her up   Every mother thinks that her daughter is a doll! Maliha laughs. She even used to embroider my clothes herself. And shed also create pleated skirts with little blazers for me and inspire me by saying, You look just like Lady Diana! Nevertheless, a fashion design business can be a behemoth that is hard to rein in, with responsibilities ranging from implementing the nitty-gritties of design to deciding upon prices and production quantities. Was Maliha inspired enough to want to join her mothers atelier? Yes, she says, I dont think that I can imagine working anywhere else.   Honestly, I dont consider my work difficult, Farah observes. I really enjoy it, and my workers have been with me from the time that I first started out. Initially, I started out with a single embroiderer. Then, I got a tailor on board. Eventually, I had seven embroiderers working with me. Slowly, the team expanded as business grew. Today, they are all like family to me. Has some of the designing now been delegated to Maliha? I do head a design team but, ultimately, everything has to be approved by my mum, she says. Its like preparing for an exam. Even though she has selected the colours and patterns from before, were still very nervous about showing her the final designs. And I can really scold her if I dont like something or there is some flaw in the design, Farah laughs. Maliha herself has two young sons. Does she find it difficult balancing motherhood with the daily rigmarole at FTA?  I think I am lucky that I work with my mother. If ever I am busy, she can take over for me, says Maliha. My elder son is now five and I have pictures of him everywhere in my workplace, him lying in the workshop, playing with scraps of cloth. We have a separate area designated for children and some of the working mothers in our staff bring their children along with them. Also, I live mere minutes away from the FTA studio, and my mother-in-law and husband are very supportive. There are times when I can pick my son from school, make sure that hes had lunch and then return to work for three hours in the evening. There are other times when I am at a shoot that starts at seven in the morning and ends at seven in the evening and I cant leave at any point. It can get difficult and hectic, but I am lucky to have people who support me.  She adds: I support them too! When my husband travels, I take on more responsibilities too. What are the challenges that Maliha faces as a working mother? I think that theres a lot of mum guilt, especially because everything gets posted on social media and you worry that you may not have done enough for your child.  Its an Instagram world and you may have spent an hour decorating a basket for your childs school activity while other parents may have invested an entire day into it. And even though your child is happy, you start fretting that, perhaps, I should have made a better costume, or created a better basket. Also, people judge very quickly. You want to be there for your child but, sometimes, you cant manage a play date thats at 2pm or at 4pm. I dont remember our parents ever facing such pressures. I wonder out loud whether pressures were perhaps different back when Farah started working on her design business. Was she the odd one out at a time when not many women worked? Yes, she says, but I was lucky that my husband was very understanding. Also, I started small and only built up my business over time. Yes, a lot of my friends would constantly be meeting and I wouldnt be able to, because I was at work. I have been very lucky  I love what I do and everyone around me has been very supportive. Maliha seems to have inherited a similar love for the brand. I reminisce about how FTA initially started making waves on social media with the aid of creative campaigns, celebrity collaborations and fun behind-the-scenes (BTS) footage from shoots.  Maliha says: I love marketing, Ive studied it too. We started coming up with BTS content back when very few people were doing it, and I enjoy curating campaigns for new collections. But I do think that what I enjoy the most is the designing process. I know that its important to keep an eye on profits and set targets, but we have people who worry about all this. If I started thinking about finances all the time, I feel that my creativity would suffer. And my mums the same. Like mother, like daughter. A love for design binds Farah Talib Aziz and Maliha Aziz together as does their love for each other. Mothers are usually the number one women in their childrens lives. In the case of this particular mother-daughter power pair, we could perhaps add in number one boss and mentor.  And Maliha can be number one employee. Published in Dawn, ICON, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Wheats tricky procurement
Description : The ongoing protests by farmers against the governments wheat procurement policy have triggered a debate. Some question why the government persists with a controlled wheat marketing system despite its widespread recognition as a failure, particularly in supporting smallholders, who make up over 90 per cent of the total farmers. It is pertinent to mention that this large-scale procurement, often relying on unsustainable commercial borrowing at high interest, is usually justified in the name of smallholders or national food security, especially when the announced wheat support price exceeds the international price, as in 2024.
Every year, the governments intervention in wheat procurement begins with announcing the wheat support price. This matter frequently sparks intense controversy, as farmers and the government are often at odds. Farmers always insist on cost-plus support price, as they have no sensible justification or incentive to grow wheat otherwise. Additionally, they compare the financial returns of various crops and make rational choices based on potential profitability. Their cost structure depends on the prices of agricultural inputs such as fertiliser, diesel, electricity, seed, pesticides, and labour. Govts inability to set a sustainable wheat support price policy due to the cumbersome and corrupt procurement system harms farmers profits and national agricultural productivity The cost of agricultural inputs rises every year, and since farmers sometimes have to buy these inputs over the notified prices  fertiliser is a classic example  they expect support prices to increase proportionally, regardless of international market trends. However, since we live in a global village with frequent trade between countries, any policy discussion would remain incomplete without factoring in the dynamics of global markets. Data from the past 10 years on wheat support prices, corresponding international prices, and the dollar exchange rate on April 1  the start of the harvest season  reveal that in 2014, 2020, 2021, 2022, and 2023, farmers received lower than the international prices. For instance, on April 1, 2022, the international wheat price was $495 per metric ton, and the dollar exchange rate stood at Rs183.4, which equated to Rs4,287 per 40kg. Yet, the government support price was just Rs2,200. Assuming that farmers kept 50pc of the total national production  26 million metric tonnes  for their own consumption and as seed for the next crop, with the remaining sold, this amounted to Rs678 billion taken out of farmers pockets in a single year due to price disparity. However, there is another side to the story. In 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018, and 2019, Pakistans farmers received higher wheat prices than international ones (as of April 1). This was largely due to the PML-N governments much-criticised policy of artificially capping the dollar exchange rate at about Rs100, which made food imports cheaper  a strategy that could not be sustained over the long term. For example, on April 1, 2016, the international wheat price was $187 per metric ton. With an exchange rate of Rs104.72, this translated to Rs783 per 40 kg, while the government paid Rs1,300 to farmers. Regrettably, during these years, smallholders  those with less than 12 acres of land whose interests are often cited in policy discussions  did not benefit from the support prices due to the cumbersome, sluggish, and corruption-ridden government procurement system. As a result, they had to sell their wheat in the open market at significantly lower prices.
Conversely, in years when international prices were high, government authorities restricted the inter-district movement of wheat. They forcibly lifted wheat stocks from farmers houses, disregarding even the sanctity of chadar and char-diwari. In both scenarios, smallholders ended up disadvantaged, while medium-large farmers with political clout, middlemen, and millers were the ultimate beneficiaries of the procurement system. With a carry-forward of four million metric tons of wheat, mainly due to the import of over 3.2m metric tons just before the new crops harvest, coupled with the low procurement targets set by the Federal and Punjab governments, wheat is currently being sold in the grain markets far below the support price almost equal to international prices. The announced support price has become nothing more than a joke. In this context, if the government finds itself unable to procure significant quantities of wheat at the support price due to persistent financial constraints, a potential policy option could be for the government to stop announcing a support price from next year onward and let the wheat market operate based on market dynamics, similar to the rice and maise markets in Pakistan. However, the government could still procure wheat from the private sector to the extent necessary to ensure food security and price stability. To stabilise the domestic wheat market, the government can consider importing wheat or releasing its strategic reserves, with or without subsidies, depending on the situation. The question is: what will farmers do if the government does not announce a support price and international prices also remain low? Since the production cost and, in turn, profitability per 40kg vary from farm to farm depending on crop yield, farmers with lower crop productivity would try to increase their yields, given the significant yield gap between progressive and conventional farmers. Alternatively, they could switch to other alternative crops like canola, mustard, sunflower, chickpeas, and maise. Already, excessive wheat cultivation has limited the acreage available for chickpeas and edible oilseeds, leading to large-scale imports of these crops every year. In conclusion, it makes economic sense to specialise in crops that enable a more efficient allocation of resources at the national level. However, for the proposed policy to succeed, it is imperative that our grain markets and agricultural inputs markets  especially fertilisers  function efficiently and fairly, free from the manipulation of mafias. Khalid Wattoo is a farmer and development professional, and Dr. Waqar Ahmad is a former Associate Professor at the University of Agriculture, Faisalabad. Published in Dawn, The Business and Finance Weekly, May 6th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : No such thing as strategic state-owned enterprises, says Finance Minister Aurangzeb
Description : Finance Minister Muhammad Aurangzeb on Sunday said that there was no such thing as strategic state-owned enterprises (SOEs) as he stressed the need for privatisation. He made the remarks at a pre-budget conference in Lahore, two days after  Deputy Prime Minister Ishaq Dar said the government would limit its business only to strategic and essential SOEs under its domain but their number would be reduced from 40 after scrutiny. Chairing the Cabinet Committee on Privatisation (CCoP) meeting, which was attended by the finance minister, Dar said privatisation of loss-making SOEs would be a priority. The meeting noted that 40 SOEs were currently categorised as strategic or essential, but respective ministries would submit their details to the Cabinet Committee on State-Owned Enterprises (CCoSOE). The CCoSOE will determine the status of the SOEs to be categorised as strategic or essential entities. Speaking on Sunday, Aurangzeb said: There is no such as [a] strategic SOE. Talking about the meeting chaired by Dar on Friday, he continued, We are absolutely on the same wavelength  that there is no such thing as a strategic SOE. The finance minister said that a meeting would be held tomorrow where we will go back to various ministries and say that all this should be handed over to the private sector. There will be public-private partnership and we will accelerate the privatisation agenda, he said. Commenting on concerns regarding the privatisation of Pakistan International Airlines (PIA), Aurangzeb said the government was not just looking at foreign investors. They are local and foreign investors who are bidding [] there is no such thing that we are only looking at foreign investors, he said. Commenting on a fresh loan programme with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) programme, he said that a larger and longer programme was needed to bring permanence in macroeconomic stability and structural reforms. He also talked about energy reforms, saying that there were leakages and stressed the need for stopping theft. He said that changes were being brought to the boards of distribution companies (Discos) in order to bring in those from the private sector for better corporate governance. And then you will see how we bring those Discos towards concessions or privatisation or a combination of both, he emphasised. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : IMF mission to meet Pakistani authorities next week to discuss next phase of engagement: official
Description : An International Monetary Fund (IMF) mission will meet Pakistani authorities next week to discuss the next phase of engagement, an official from the international money lender said on Sunday. Speaking to Dawn.com, Esther Perez Ruiz, the Funds resident representative for Pakistan, said: A mission team led by Nathan Porter, IMFs mission chief to Pakistan, will meet with authorities next week to discuss the next phase of engagement. The aim is to lay the foundation for better governance and stronger, more inclusive, and resilient economic growth that will benefit all Pakistanis, she added. Pakistan last month completed a short-term $3 billion programme, which helped stave off sovereign default, but the government has stressed the need for a fresh, longer-term programme. Last week, the Fund said that a mission was expected to visit Pakistan this month to discuss the FY25 budget, policies, and reforms under a potential new programme for the welfare of all Pakistanis. Pakistan narrowly averted default last summer, and the $350bn economy has stabilised after the completion of the last IMF programme, with inflation coming down to around 17 per cent in April from a record high 38pc last May. The country is still dealing with a high fiscal shortfall and while the external account deficit has been controlled through import control mechanisms, it has come at the expense of stagnating growth, which is expected to be around 2pc this year compared to negative growth last year. Pakistan is expected to seek at least $6bn and request additional financing from the Fund under the Resilience and Sustainability Trust. On Friday, the Fund said that downside risks for the economy remain exceptionally high. Downside risks remain exceptionally high. While the new government has indicated its intention to continue the SBAs (standby arrangement) policies, political uncertainty remains significant, said the IMF in its staff report following the second and final review under the standby agreement. The Fund added that political complexities and high cost of living could weigh on policy, adding that policy slippages, together with lower external financing, could undermine the narrow path to debt sustainability and place pressure on the exchange rate. The IMF also said higher commodity prices and disruptions to shipping, or tighter global financial conditions, would also adversely affect external stability for the cash-strapped nation. The fund stressed the need for timely post-programme external financing disbursements. Additional input from Reuters Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Situation in AJK calms down after 2 days of violent clashes
Description : Following violent clashes over the last 48 hours, which left a policeman dead, the situation in Muzaffarabad seemed to have calmed down on Sunday, with a Rangers detachment that was sent to Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK) from Kohala having been withdrawn. AJK witnessed violent clashes between the police and activists of a rights movement amid a wheel-jam and shutter-down strike across the territory on Friday and Saturday, which left at least one police official dead and more than 90 others injured, officials told Dawn.com on Saturday. Mirpur Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP) Kamran Ali had said that Sub-inspector Adnan Qureshi succumbed to a gunshot wound in the chest in the town of Islamgarh, where he was deployed to stop a rally for Muzaffarabad under the banner of the Jammu Kashmir Joint Awami Action Committee (JAAC). The JAAC, which has traders at the forefront in most parts of the state, has been seeking the provision of electricity as per hydropower generation cost in AJK, subsidised wheat flour and an end to the privileges of the elite class. They called for the strike following the arrest of at least 70 of their members in raids on Thursday. Reports emerged in the wake of the protests on Sunday that three Rangers battalions had entered the territory through Kohala and were awaiting further orders. However, AJK Minister for Rural Development Faisal Mumtaz Rathore confirmed that the Rangers, due to the intervention of President Asif Zardari, were called back as soon as they entered Azad Kashmir since the situation had calmed down. Meanwhile, in Islamabad, former prime minister of AJK Sardar Abdul Qayyum Niazi slammed the deployment, calling it a drama and an attempt to score political points. First they send them, then call them back, what is this? the ex-AJK PM said. Those fighting for their rights and engaging in protest are free to do so, but they must remain peaceful, Niazi said in a press conference. He added that they (the protestors) must not give the enemy a chance to sow discord within the territory and create infighting. In a post on Facebook, Rathore acknowledged the public demands for cheap electricity, but admitted that addressing them was out of his hands. The big demand of the people, the demand for cheap electricity and the end of loadshedding, falls under the jurisdiction of the Government of Pakistan, Rathore said. Urging the public to remain peaceful, he said, In this one year [I have been in office], I have never been against the right to peaceful protest and [never] supported violence against people. In the aftermath of the protests, JAAC leader Shaukat Nawaz Mir reiterated that the committee is a peaceful organisation and willing to negotiate with the authorities to ensure the provision of cheap electricity and cheap flour. He also appreciated the withdrawal of the Rangers from the area. We have planned another shutter-down strike, he told reporters on Sunday. We have been peaceful for the last year and always will be a peaceful movement. This territory and its institutions and police are our own. Mir maintained that the JAAC is advocating for the rights of the public in AJK, but it is the bureaucrats who do not understand the publics needs that are doing the damage. The JAAC is peaceful and open to negotiations, Mir added, requesting to be notified by the authorities about decisions taken. We do not want to hurt anyone. He also slammed the federal government for not cutting down spending while at the same time claiming they have no room in the budget to subsidise electricity or flour. The government claims they cant provide cheap electricity and flour because they have no budget, but they have the money for watches and cars, Mir said, adding that the federal government and the prime minister should be ashamed. I dont want my forum to be controversial, Mir said. We are made up of respectable politicians  the local council is standing with us. The JAAC leader added that the movement was successful since members of multiple parties and councils are on our side. Our nation is conscious now. There is no politics here, we just want our rights and identity. Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif has taken notice of the situation in AJK and urged PML-N leadership and AJK prime minister Chaudhry Anwar-ul-Haq to pursue negotiations with the JAAC. Posting on X, he said, While debate, discussion and peaceful protests are the beauties of democracy, there should be absolutely no tolerance for taking the law in ones own hands and damaging government properties. He added that amidst situations of chaos and dissent, there will always be people who rush in to score political points.
The prime minister said that he was in contact with PML-N leaders and the AJK government, urging them to talk to the JAAC and resort to [a] peaceful course of action for resolution of their (JAACs) demands. Shehbaz added that despite the efforts of detractors, the issue will be resolved soon. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Fight till the last ball, PCB chief tells cricket team in Dublin
Description : Pakistan Cricket Board (PCB) Chairman Mohsin Naqvi on Sunday told the national team to fight till the last ball ahead of the second match of a three-match T20 series against Ireland. As he met players of the mens national team in the Irish capital of Dublin, the PCB quoted him as saying: Fight till the last ball; the competition should be apparent.
On Friday, Ireland recorded their maiden T20 win against Pakistan who could not defend a solid-looking 182-5 after being put in to bat first, dealing a shocking blow to the Babar Azam-led sides preparations for the World Cup, which is taking place next month in the United States. The loss to Ireland, who are in Pakistans group in the T20 World Cup, came after a series draw on home soil to a New Zealand squad missing most of their first-choice players. With Babar only recently reinstated as captain, it was another bump in the road for their tournament preparation.
Todays match will start at 7pm, with Ireland leading the series by 1-0. In a post on X, the PCB shared a video of Naqvi meeting the Green Shirts and speaking to them, adding that a detailed discussion on the action plan took place during the two-hour-long meetup. Encouraging the team, the PCB chairman urged the players to play with hard work, passion and a professional approach. He noted that T20 cricket needed a unique and aggressive approach, adding that victory was only possible if cricket was played in a modern manner. An action plan can be formulated while sitting in a room but the real test is on the ground, where the performance should be visible, the PCB quoted him as telling the team. Naqvi praised all players as undoubtedly talented, professional and the best, adding that the teams bowling attack was splendid. However, he emphasised that great attention was required when fielding so that the opponent cannot get any chance to score. The players are the hope for Pakistan and you have to meet the nations expectations. Teamwork is the fundamental thing for victory, the PCB chairman said. He noted that the public loved cricket and had expectations from the team. Naqvi said that success would come if all 11 of the players in the team performed with unity. No one is accepting the loss in the first match against Ireland. The real test after Ireland and England is the World Cup, he added. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Canada arrests fourth Indian national in killing of Sikh activist
Description : A fourth Indian national was charged by Canadian authorities on Saturday in the 2023 killing of a separatist Sikh leader in Vancouver. Amandeep Singh, 22, was already being held for unrelated gun charges before being charged with first-degree murder and conspiracy to commit murder in the slaying of Hardeep Singh Nijjar. Three other Indian nationals were arrested this month. The killing sparked a diplomatic row between Ottawa and New Delhi when Prime Minister Justin Trudeau linked Indian intelligence to the killing. Nijjar  who immigrated to Canada in 1997 and became a citizen in 2015  had advocated for a separate Sikh state, known as Khalistan, carved out of India. He had been wanted by Indian authorities for alleged terrorism and conspiracy to commit murder  allegations he denied. He was shot dead on June 18, 2023, by masked assailants in the parking lot of the Sikh temple he led in suburban Vancouver. Trudeau announced several months later that Canada had credible allegations connecting Indian intelligence to the slaying. India dismissed the allegations as absurd and responded furiously, briefly curbing visas for Canadians and forcing Ottawa to withdraw diplomats. In November, the US Justice Department charged an Indian citizen living in the Czech Republic with allegedly plotting a similar assassination attempt on American soil. Prosecutors said in unsealed court documents that an Indian government official was also involved in the planning. The shock allegations came after US President Joe Biden hosted Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi for a rare state visit, as Washington seeks closer ties with India against Chinas growing influence. US intelligence agencies have assessed that the plot on American soil was approved by Indias top spy official at the time, Samant Goel, the Washington Post reported in April. Canada is home to some 770,000 Sikhs, who make up about two per cent of the countrys population, with a vocal minority calling for an independent state of Khalistan. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Second night of auroras seen amid extreme solar storm
Description : Auroras lit up skies across swaths of the planet for the second night in a row on Saturday, after already dazzling Earthlings from the United States to Tasmania to the Bahamas the day before. A powerful solar storm  which could continue into Sunday  has triggered spectacular celestial shows usually confined to the far northern reaches of the planet, hence their nickname of the northern lights. I have the sensation of living through a historic night in France [] It was really charged, with solar particles and emotions, Eric Lagadec, an astrophysicist at the Observatoire de Cote dAzur, wrote on social media after the first night. Find good spots, away from the lights, with a clear view to the north! Late on Saturday evening, pictures again started trickling onto social media as people in the United States reported sightings, though not as strong as Friday nights. The first of several coronal mass ejections (CMEs)  expulsions of plasma and magnetic fields from the Sun   came just after 4pm GMT on Friday, according to the US-based National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)s Space Weather Prediction Center (SWPC). It was later upgraded to an extreme geomagnetic storm   the first since the Halloween Storms of October 2003 that caused blackouts in Sweden and damaged power infrastructure in South Africa. Fridays storm was listed as hitting level five geomagnetic conditions  the highest on the scale. Saturday saw G3 to G5 conditions, with G4 or higher conditions predicted Sunday and G3 conditions possible into Monday. But no major disruptions to power or communications networks appear to have been reported this time around, despite initial worries from authorities. There have only been preliminary reports of power grid irregularities, degradation to high-frequency communications, GPS and possibly satellite navigation, the SWPC said. Elon Musk, whose Starlink satellite internet operator has some 5,000 satellites in low Earth orbit, said his satellites were under a lot of pressure, but holding up so far. However Chinas National Centre for Space Weather issued a red alert on Saturday morning, warning the storm will impact communications and navigation in most areas of the country, state news agency Xinhua reported. Auroras were visible in the northern half of the country, according to media reports. Excitement over the phenomenon   and otherworldly photos of pink, green and purple night skies   popped up across the world, from Mont Saint-Michel on the French coast to Payette, Idaho  in the western United States  to Australias island state of Tasmania.
People pose for photos as a geomagnetic storm lights up the night sky above the Bonneville Salt Flats on May 10 in Wendover, Utah.  AFP
Unlike solar flares, which travel at the speed of light and reach Earth in around eight minutes, CMEs travel at a more sedate pace, with officials putting the current average at 800 kilometres per second. The CMEs emanated from a massive sunspot cluster that is 17 times wider than our planet. People with eclipse glasses can also look for the sunspot cluster during the day. The Sun is approaching the peak of an 11-year cycle that brings heightened activity. NOAAs Brent Gordon encouraged the public to try to capture the night sky with phone cameras even if they couldnt see auroras with their naked eyes. Youd be amazed at what you see in that picture versus what you see with your eyes. Fluctuating magnetic fields associated with geomagnetic storms induce currents in long wires, including power lines, which can potentially lead to blackouts. Long pipelines can also become electrified, leading to engineering problems. Spacecraft are also at risk from high doses of radiation, although the atmosphere prevents this from reaching Earth. NASA has a dedicated team looking into astronaut safety and can ask astronauts on the International Space Station to move to places within the outpost that are better shielded. Even pigeons and other species that have internal biological compasses could be affected. Pigeon handlers have noted a reduction in birds coming home during geomagnetic storms, according to NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The most powerful geomagnetic storm in recorded history, known as the Carrington Event after British astronomer Richard Carrington, occurred in September 1859. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : ADB links support with IMFs clean chit
Description :   Given my interactions with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the dialogue decisiveness of the current government, I feel very hopeful that there will be a successor programme from the Fund, said the Asian Development Banks (ADB) Country Director for Pakistan Yong Ye in an exclusive interview on the sidelines of ADBs 57th Annual Meeting in Tbilisi this week. Tacitly indicating that support from ADB would only be possible with a clean chit from the Fund, Mr Ye expressed cautious optimism for the economy. Highlighting the uncertainties from last year, Mr Ye termed the IMF agreement announced in June as a miracle. Since then, however, he said, the caretaker government did a good job stabilising the economy under the Funds Stand-By Arrangement. More importantly, he added, with the IMF agreement in place, the central banks foreign exchange reserves increased from $4.4 billion to over $9bn in the week ending on May 3. While the country may still be in the ICU, its immediate liquidity crisis has been sorted, and default has been avoided. This has given some confidence to the markets, he said. Record highs of PSX Commenting on the frequent new highs of the Pakistan Stock Exchange (PSX), Mr Ye observed that previously, when the eurobond payment was due, there had been a lot of hype in the media with speculations about whether the country would be able to repay or default. Such pieces did not induce courage and the markets started fluctuating, contributing to a fluctuating exchange rate. Banks top official says Pakistan has sorted out immediate liquidity crisis, but still in ICU This time around, in April, when the $1bn eurobond payment was due, it was paid without fanfare, indicating much better market confidence. Other positive indicators, such as a narrowing external account deficit and recovering remittances, have also improved investor confidence. However, fiscal deficit challenges remain. One major reason behind them is the high interest rate and high debt servicing burden. Act on what you know In my first meeting with Finance Minister Muhammad Aurangzeb, he showed his commitment to implementing and acting on reforms, said Mr Ye. Pakistan does not need more economic prescriptions, he said, agreeing with the finance ministers recent statements. He said the general perception is that Pakistan knows what it needs to do but never does it. Act on what you know needs to be done. He emphasised that the ADB management wants to be with the government in this difficult time. The agency understands the need to ensure that the debt is sustainable rather than an added burden that does not remove the constraints the country is facing. While the economy is recovering, there is still uncertainty moving forward. The removal of this uncertainty depends very much on the governments commitment and ability to implement economic and structural reforms. A special arrangement Mr Ye emphasised the importance of investment in reviving the economy and the role the Special Investment Facilitation Council (SIFC) could play. My understanding of SIFC is that it is a special arrangement to attract foreign direct investment from some targeted countries, he said. From the ADBs point of view, while the SIFC may be a quick short-term solution, Pakistan still needs to look for long-term systematic solutions to attract foreign direct investment. This would require an overall enabling environment with improved regulations and transparency. Given past unsuccessful incidents such as Reko Diq, SIFC, at least in the short run, can demonstrate the countrys potential and ability for investment, which can then be further broadened for other countries. An important element in attracting FDI is the ability of firms to repatriate profit out of the country. At the moment, investors may believe that while earning money in Pakistan is possible, repatriating profits is challenging. Non-productivity of real estate The country needs to increase its revenue and rationalise expenditures, Mr Ye remarked. As an example, he highlights the real estate sector where a lot of savings are invested. The real estate sector is just financial addition with no value addition. If the country invests in its natural resources instead, the country will start rolling, he said. Inflation is on a downward trend, and if this trend continues, the monetary policy rate will come down, Mr Ye opinioned, resulting in a smaller burden of debt servicing and more fiscal room. This will also unlock the investment and borrowing by the private sector, he hoped. Since there is a lot of pent-up investment demand during the period of high interest rates, Pakistan may enter into a boom cycle when the rates start coming down. But for the revival to be sustainable, it all comes back to reforms, he said.  Remaining pledges While ADB was among the institutions that pledged support after the disastrous floods of 2022, almost the entire amount has yet to be disbursed. ADB had pledged about $1.5bn, of which only $108.79 million has been released according to a media report, with a further $340.9m expected this year. In response to why there has been a delay, Mr Ye said that the amount pledged was for reconstruction and that the process cannot be rushed. The damages have to be assessed along with the ground realities, keeping in mind the new climate risk profile and the possibility that these areas may be flooded again, he said. Pointing out that water was still standing in some areas till the start of this year, Mr Ye said that the new climate risk profile needs to be assessed before the feasibility study. Some roads need to be redesigned, followed by the procurement process, contract award, and finally, disbursement. The entire process is lengthy. Mr Ye identified several critical areas for Pakistans long-term economic growth. These include controlling inflation, reducing the fiscal deficit, and diversifying the export base. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Govt hints at raising wheat purchase target
Description :  Drive to buy 400,000 tonnes of grain kicks off; farmers want wheat procured from across Punjab
 Kissan leader urges govt to ensure official rate of staple, terms proposed subsidy a pittance LAHORE: The Pakistan Agricultural Storage and Services Corporation Limited (Passco) on Saturday began its second phase of wheat procurement from Faisalabad in line with a decision of the federal government to procure 400,000 tonnes more than the original target of 1.4 million tonnes. As he kick-started the second phase, Food Minister Rana Tanveer hinted at the possibility of further increasing the target to facilitate farmers. Passco had originally aimed to purchase 1.4m tonnes, but after farmers started protesting, the pressure on the federal and provincial governments piled on and the premier decided to increase the target to 1.8m tonnes. As of now, Passco has achieved 98 per cent of the initial target and distribution of gunny bags is already underway to meet the increased target. Farmers, however, are not happy with the governments decision to procure slightly more wheat than intended. They said Passco  a federal body  operated in 13 out of 97 tehsils in Punjab and the decision to purchase additional wheat from designated areas would have a negligible impact. According to farmers, the tradeable surplus this year is expected to be about 10m tonnes and buying 400,000 tonnes would hardly make any difference. Punjab, on the other hand, is reluctant to procure wheat from growers despite province-wide agitations and the persistent stance of farmers. This has also caused a significant impact on the price of wheat, with the staple being sold at a rate much lower than the official price of Rs3,900 per 40kg. The Pakistan Kissan Ittehad claimed that farmers had lost Rs1,150 billion under the wheat head alone due to the crashing prices which reportedly dipped below Rs3,000 per 40kg. Instead of procurement, the Punjab government said it would compensate farmers with interest-free loans of Rs150bn. Kissan leader Khalid Mahmood Khokar, however, is not impressed, saying the paltry subsidy came at a cost of Rs1,150bn. Instead of this gimmickry, please ensure an officially declared price, which the provincial government had itself calculated, announced, and promised, Mr Khalid urged the Punjab government. The crisis Pakistan is going through the most difficult wheat season of its history, exacerbated by policy failure and the import of millions of tonnes of wheat shortly before the bumper harvest. The bumper crop followed a record import of 3.5m tonnes by the private sector allegedly due to the weakness of the caretaker regime.
Against the backdrop of such a huge import, hoarders also released their stock to earn profit. The releases of stock by the hoarders and the import of the commodity flooded the market and even met the entire domestic requirement, leaving Passco and the Punjab Food Department with 4m tonnes of unexhausted stock. The 3.5m tonnes imports were staggered in a way, in the name of sustained supplies, that it overlapped with domestic harvesting season and created havoc for the domestic market, explained Muhammad Ramzan, a wheat trader from Lahore. At the start of this month, the Punjab government had promised a probe into the wheat scandal against the backdrop of protests by the farmers. On Friday, the farmers resumed their protests from Multan against the provincial governments decision to not buy wheat from farmers. At the protest, PKI leader Khokhar had said the agitation would continue against the government in every district of the province till the acceptance of their demands. He had said the federal government was procuring the wheat in 16 tehsils of the province, while the Punjab government had not purchased even a single grain so far. Federal government should also buy wheat from other tehsils of the province, he had demanded. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : KP governor, CM Gandapur exchange threats in acrid spat
Description : PESHAWAR / DERA ISMAIL KHAN: The acrimony between Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Chief Minister Ali Amin Khan Gandapur and Governor Faisal Karim Kundi intensified on Saturday when the two leaders threatened each other with dire consequences. A day after the governors fiery speech, Chief Minister Gandapur warned Governor Kundi to stay within the limits of his constitutional position and avoid making olitical statements. After appearing in an anti-terrorism court in connection with the murder of former KP law minister Sardar Israrullah Khan Gandapur, the CM who belongs to the PTI said he could use his powers to banish Mr Kundi from Governor House. This Governor House is not your property. Dont force me to  turn it into a museum and open it for the public.
I will shift you to a two-room annexe, said Mr Gandapur. He went on to say that even fuel for the governors official vehicles comes from the budget of the provincial government and threatened to stop it if the governor who belongs to PPP didnt refrain from political statements, below-the-belt remarks and confrontation. Gandapur warns Kundi will be banished from official residence for indulging in politics, confrontation Youre the governor; politics is not your job, Mr Gandapur warned, calling himself the elected representative who came to power with the voters mandate. The CM added that if the governor did not pay heed to his warning, he would seek his removal. [T]he letter which notified you [as governor] will also denotify you. In a hard-hitting speech on Friday, Governor Kundi had indirectly accused the CM of being involved in the killing of former law minister Mr Israrullah and ANP leader Umar Khattab Sherani.
Mr Israrullah was killed in a suicide attack in his hometown of Kulachi near Dera Ismail Khan in October 2013. While government officials blamed the Waziristan-based Gandapur group for the bombing, a little-known shadowy group, Ansarul Mujahideen, claimed responsibility. ANPs Mr Sherani was murdered in December 2021, a day before the provinces local government elections, which he was contesting as a candidate for the post of D.I. Khan mayor. The governor said that if he relinquished his constitutional post, he would prove to be a bigger nemesis for CM Gandapur. Mr Kundi also warned that protecting the Governor House was his constitutional duty and whoever tried to occupy it would be dragged on roads. This was an apparent reply to Mr Gandapurs May 9 statement in which he warned against efforts to impose governors rule in KP and said PTI activists would occupy the Governor House. Want good ties with CM Meanwhile, in conversation with Dawn, Mr Kundi said he hoped for good relations with the chief minister, but whoever talked about occupying the Governor House will be answered befittingly. People of KP shouldnt suffer in the fight between the prime minister, governor and chief minister, he said, advising the provincial government to improve the law and order situation. He recalled the kidnapping of a sessions judge in Tank last month and claimed the chief minister paid extortion money for his release. Expected animosity The acrimonious relationship between the two leaders  both being bitter political rivals hailing from D.I.Khan  was expected since Mr Kundi was nominated for the post by his partys chairman, Bilawal Bhutto-Zardari. The CM expressed his disapproval of the appointment by not attending  Mr Kundis oath-taking ceremony last Saturday. A few days later, on May 8, the governor KP did not sign a summary moved by the provincial government to convene an assembly session, forcing the provincial government to requisition the session through the speaker to present the current fiscal budget, according to sources. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Footprints: the day the city of Karachi went berserk
Description : This article was originally published on May 12, 2017 KARACHI: Attempt after attempt fails to elicit comments from direct witnesses to the carnage that took place in Karachi on May 12 ten years ago. All these men served as judges in the countrys high courts and the apex court before they retired to re-join the legal fraternity as seasoned practitioners of the law. For each of my requests, I receive either excuse me, or sorry. Finally, one of them agrees to talk  but not openly.  Please dont mention my name, says the retired Sindh High Court judge as our conversation ends. You may write each and every word I have shared with you but not my name. I would prefer to be an anonymous source. One never knows here what can happen the next day: its better to stay away from even the memories of such controversial events. The ordeal he recalls of that bloody Saturday refreshes the grim memories of the city being under siege for nearly 24 hours, held hostage by forces in the face of whom even jurists and law-enforcers were helpless.  Two rival rallies had been planned that day  one by the legal fraternity, backed by parties then in the opposition, to welcome into the city the then deposed chief justice, Iftikhar Mohammed Chaudhry, and the other organised by the Muttahida Qaumi Movement (MQM), favoured by the then military dictator General Pervez Musharraf, in protest against the politicisation of the issue of the presidential reference against Mr Chaudhry. A certain level of fear had prevailed, but no one could have guessed the deeply disturbing events that were to follow  certainly not the then serving high court judge. I was travelling with my driver and armed guard to the Sindh High Court where the chief justice had to deliver an address when we were forced to stop near Sir Syed Girls College in Nazimabad, he says.  Armed motorcyclists surrounded his official, flag-bearing car, pulled out his driver and switched off its engine, seizing the keys. The bikers then bludgeoned the stationary car several times, so hard that its bumper fell off. In one of the busiest and most densely populated city neighbourhoods, a serving judge sat in fear.  I talked to them, he says. They were obviously aware that I was a high court judge. After debate and argument, they allowed me to leave but I reminded them that I couldnt because keys of my car had been snatched by one of them. Finally, the key was returned and the judge was allowed to leave. As he got back into his car, the men surrounding him came up with their last strike: they stripped his car of the national flag. At the nearest police station of Pak Colony, he waited for nearly two hours for police security to arrive, as promised by the Governors House after it was informed about the episode. Then came an SSP-ranking officer with his team to escort me, he says. The police left us some two kilometres from the Singh High Court building, saying that they could no longer help us. My driver parked the car at a safer place. Then, with my driver and guard, I walked to the high court to find all entrances blocked. Finally, I jumped over one of the walls to enter the building. If this was the experience of a high court judge, one can only imagine the situation for political workers. In anticipation of the two rallies, law enforcers had been put on high alert the day before. The fire brigade had been directed to remain on standby and hospitals were asked to ready themselves. But the next day, hapless citizens found that the city had been abandoned by the law-enforcement agencies, and armed youths were wandering at will. Nasir Khan, one of the Awami National Party workers, witnessed a few of them at Malir Halt. I meet Nasir almost at the same spot where he narrowly escaped death. As our rally from Quaidabad reached here [Malir Halt], it came under fire, he says. I miraculously remained unhurt but I watched two of my friends die from bullet wounds and several others fell injured. It was a terrible experience and even today I shiver while recalling that day. After 10 years, only eyewitness accounts of the May 12 events remain. Justice and any action on the part of the state are still awaited. Should we call ourselves humanity when the fallen remain un-avenged a year to a day since that fateful day in May? wrote Justice Qazi Faez Isa, a Supreme Court judge and former chief justice of the Balochistan High Court, in this paper in 2008. Years later, the question remains pertinent. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2017  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Mothers Day: Reflections of a mother
Description : This piece was originally published in Dawn, Young World on May 9, 2020. Spending sleepless nights while tending to children, feeding them, changing diapers, etc. are a part of life of every mother having infants. When the infants grow up a little, the next phase is to educate them, teach them manners and make them learn to be a part of the world out there. It is tough to do all that for me, like every other mother. After all it is not all I have to do. One has to focus on ones career and household chores at the same time, and fulfil ones duties towards other family members. Did I mention a me-time somewhere in all that I said? I guess not. There is no mentioning of it simply because there is no time left for me while doing all that I do. It is said that you learn about the true value of parents once you have children of your own. I have found this to be exactly true. The sacrifices and unconditional love it takes to be a mother has certainly made me realise the sacrifices my mother made in bringing me up. Looking back at my life, I wish I could change all those moments in my life when, as a child, I misbehaved with my mother. I also wish that I had spent more time with her and made life easier for her. As my children grow up, they seem to become less obedient and respectful. This really hurts. I see this as a general trend in all the children, nowadays. With some exceptions, the older they get, the less respect they show to their mother and elders in general. Having a mind of ones own is fine, but there cannot be any excuse for bad behaviour towards ones mother. And also just because your mother is less strict and more friendly than your father, it should not lead you to not show respect to her. Mothers like me do not want our children to be our puppets. All we ask for is recognition of our love and efforts. Expecting respectfulness is a part of that recognition. Every mother would love her child to come up to her and, as a minimum, thank her for her efforts. It would be great if the child could offer to help her in little ways. If nothing else, they should at least not leave any mess for the mother to clean up! Mothers Day is important, but it is more than just a special day. It is really a reminder that mothers deserve our respect and recognition for their love at all times. For a child to have this realisation certainly means more to mothers than having a card or flowers on Mothers Day. This is because it means that this realisation would translate into care and respect for ones mother. For my part, I have started taking care of my mother in all the ways I can. While I do not live with her, I try my best to stay in touch or visit her as much as I can. Taking care of her health and what she wants has become very important for me. It does not matter to me what others do or say about taking care of their mothers. All that matters is what my mother deserves. And that exactly is my message to you all! Do not look at what others do, think of what you can do for your mother, who deserves all the love and respect that one can. Mothers can be your friends too if you learn to share things with her. It is just a misunderstanding that they would not understand you or what you want. You can talk about anything with her: sports, cartoons, TV shows, super heroes, general knowledge, etc. You would be pleasantly surprised when you do end up confiding in her or discussing things with her. I am lucky that I get cards and flowers from my family on Mothers Day. But many things remain left to be desired on the other 364 days of the year. Still whatever my children do the rest of the year, I would never stop caring for and loving them. I guess thats what the motherhood is all about. Happy Mothers Day everyone, but make every day Mothers Day, for she never fails to make everyday special for her children. Published in Dawn, Young World, May 9th, 2020 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Indian elections
Description : THE Islamophobic rhetoric being employed by Narendra Modi for this election campaign has become shrill. Pakistan has nearly always been an electoral issue in India. However, this time, it is Indian Muslims who are bearing the brunt of the Indian prime ministers hate speech. Speaking in Rajasthan last month, he called Muslims infiltrators and said they produce too many children. In Gujarat, where, as chief minister, he had overseen the massacre of Muslims in 2002, he accused the Congress of seeking to loot Indias wealth and redistribute it among Muslims, and of organising a vote jihad against his leadership. Later, he accused the Congress and Muslims of stealing Hindu wealth and property.
Modis inflammatory rhetoric was followed by the BJPs campaign video portraying Muslims as outsiders who plundered Indias wealth. As concerns grew about communal violence, the video was removed. These allegations are a sequel to Modis public referencing of earlier conspiracy theories of love jihad (Muslims forcibly converting Hindu women and marrying them to increase the Muslim population) or land jihad (capturing land to construct religious structures and gaining control of Indias territory). Concerns that his rhetoric might incite further violence against Indian Muslims are increasing. Ordinarily, since Hindus are in a majority in India, it may be difficult to question the rationale of creating a Hindu state. However, two observations are in order. One, the expansionist designs of the cherished Hindu state seek the creation of an Akhand Bharat, a Hindu right fantasy, which would violate the territorial integrity of Nepal, Bangladesh, Pakistan, and Afghanistan, as per a map displayed in the new parliament building. This is not acceptable to the aforementioned independent states. Two, though the creation of a Hindu state should not translate into discrimination against minorities, regrettably this will be the case. The works of French political scientist Christophe Jaffrelot illustrate how Muslims, 14.5 per cent of Indias population, are grossly underrepresented in bureaucracy, the judiciary, police, and legislative organs. They are second-class citizens.
The Muslim-majority area of Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmiri is also being subjected to demographic engineering. The destruction of the centuries-old Babri Masjid by Hindu zealots in 1992 and the construction of a temple in its place has set a precedent that might be followed for other historic mosques. This contrasts sharply with the UAEs gesture of permitting a Hindu temple in Abu Dhabi. Modis anti-Muslim rhetoric is raising concerns of violence. Analysts are also pointing out the fascist tendencies of the BJP regime, a steep decline in democratic values, and a departure from the moorings of pluralism and secularism on which modern India was founded. In her book The Incarcerations, Alpa Shah contends that Modis India is using its national security apparatus to incarcerate ordinary citizens for their dissenting views. Commenting on the book, Arundhati Roy stated that this was about criminalisation and incarceration of dissent itself. Strikingly, the Modi regime has also used art and culture to project the Hindutva philosophy. Kunal Purohits book H-Pop: The Secretive World of Hindutva Pop Stars shows how Hindutva pop stars and influencers are being used to spread the message of Hindu supremacy and create acceptance of Hindutvas core beliefs. Apart from this, Modi is playing on his governments accomplishments: making India the worlds fifth largest economy; the construction of 50,000 kilometres of national highways; boosting Indias military spending; building Vikrant, Indias first domestically built aircraft carrier; and the Chandrayaan-3 moon landing. His prospects of winning a third term have been bolstered by a weak opposition. Despite the formation of the Congress-led 37-party INDIA coalition, there is no real challenge. What has bolstered his outreach is Indias enhanced global standing. In his book Why Bharat Matters, S. Jaishankar presents India as a leader of the global south and makes a case for the rejuvenation of India as a civilisational state.
There are some lessons that Pakistan could learn from Indias electoral process. One, despite the large scale of Indias elections (969 million registered voters; 1m polling stations) and the use of electronic voting machines, election results are largely accepted without much ado. Two, there is no caretaker government, as the incumbents become caretakers in a way, and refrain from announcing major policy decisions or sanctioning expenditure for development schemes. If Modi wins a third term, he is likely to maintain his pro-Hindutva, anti-Muslim, and hegemonic attitude towards regional countries, particularly Pakistan. The write is a former foreign secretary and chairman of Sanober Institute Islamabad. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Who can rock the hybrid boat?
Description : A NUMBER of developments over the past week suggest that the establishment is keen to enforce/ maintain the status quo and the only impediment in its path may be an assertive superior judiciary that has been increasingly finding its feet in recent weeks. If jailed PTI leader and former prime minister Imran Khans article in UKs conservative right-wing Telegraph newspaper blaming the military leadership directly for all his woes the week before was not hint enough of the state of play, two public statements by the latter clarified issues rather unambiguously. The first came in the DG ISPRs press briefing, which was ostensibly called to discuss Afghanistan-based terrorist groups involvement in attacks on Chinese nationals working on development projects in the country. But in response to a couple of questions about the PTI and Imran Khan related to the events of May 9 last year, the DG ISPR stated unequivocally that the only path to rehabilitation for the political party and its leaders was to seek forgiveness for attacking your own forces.
Then, perhaps, talks could happen and that too with political parties (ie, the government), as the military had nothing to do with politics. Imran Khan has been consistent in saying he wouldnt talk to the powerless political parties and that a meaningful dialogue is possible only with the military. The DG ISPR also lamented the delay in the prosecution and sentencing of all those responsible for the May mayhem  including the leaders and mastermind against whom irrefutable evidence has been gathered and submitted  and, in doing so, appeared to hint at the establishments frustrations with what it perceives as roadblocks being erected by the judiciary. The content of the live presser evoked an equally adamant response from the PTI, which went on the offensive, reiterating its stance that May 9 was a false flag operation, accusing the militarys spokesman of being economical with the truth, and saying it would be happy to live with the findings of an impartial judicial commission into the May 9 events and would even apologise if found to be at fault. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. The military spokesman had pre-empted this demand in his briefing earlier by saying if a probe were to happen, as was being demanded, it ought to start with 2014, and not nine years later. The 2014 PTI sit-in in the federal capital was said to have been instigated and backed by the then ISI chief. This was the first indication that the military was prepared to hold its own accountable for past follies, if it paved the way for the trials and sentencing of PTI leaders it says were responsible for the attacks on defence installations in a number of cities in Punjab and KP. While the spokesman left nothing to the imagination, on the first anniversary of May 9, the army chief added his voice to his chief spokesmans in terms of stressing the need for punishing the perpetrators of the violence a year earlier, also lashing out against what he called digital terrorism.
This indicates that harsher curbs on social media are planned. So far, the PTI has had overwhelming social media dominance and had been able to keep a step ahead of its adversaries, but we will find out soon whether it has what it takes to bypass software the Chinese have developed over the years (and Pakistan has reportedly acquired) and successfully used to block dissident content. With this ever-widening gulf between the establishment and the party it once saw as a panacea for all that ails Pakistan, the one thing that many felt could force a rethink in the establishment would have been a public manifestation of the immense support enjoyed by the PTI, as evidenced in last Februarys elections. Many Pakistan watchers keenly waited all day for multitudes of PTI supporters to spill out onto the roads and streets of major urban conurbations on the party leaders call to break the shackles and protest on May 9. But the brutal crackdown of the past one year seems to have knocked the wind out of the partys sails and worn down the workers will. People may turn out to vote for it in droves, but did not appear prepared to risk life, limb and liberty in coming out for mass protests. Some small localised protests did happen, but had zero impact in the sense of influencing decision-making in the corridors of power. Going forward, a couple of factors will play a role in steering developments. The first and foremost will be the confidence the army chief has in his control over his institution. His predecessor appointed a dozen major generals to three stars in his final six weeks in office and left the incumbent little room in terms of forming his own team. Natural attrition and the more dramatic exit of a couple of three stars on disciplinary grounds recently has, 18 months down the line, given the chief an opportunity to place senior officers of his own choosing in key roles which will give him greater freedom of action both inside and outside the institution. The promotion of three officers this week, including the DG ISPR, to three stars was another step in that direction. The military saw May 9 as a coup against the chief, a failed attempt to dislodge him from office. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. With the PTI protests failing to gather momentum, the only impediment in his path seems to be an increasingly assertive superior judiciary. It can and will, in all likelihood, challenge the establishments pre-eminence in decision-making. It isnt clear how the latter plans to deal with that, especially because it believes that a direly needed economic revival is only possible under the umbrella of a hybrid set-up and in a relatively calm political environment. Only the judiciary can rock its boat now. The writer is a former editor of Dawn. abbas.nasir@hotmail.com Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Looming pension crisis cries out for corrective measures
Description : Pension reform is again a hot topic, but this time, bureaucrats will make it appear as if it is intended to benefit top officials. The reforms go beyond just raising the retirement age or taxing pensions. Instead, a series of actions, similar to those that were done in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP), should be seriously considered to reduce the cost of pensions to the government exchequer. The national pension cost will reach nearly Rs2 trillion in FY24, and it is predicted to rise to Rs10tr in the next decade if no reforms are implemented. In 2002-03, the pension cost stood at Rs25 billion, but in a span of just 20 years, it skyrocketed to over Rs1.5tr. Pension reforms have previously been tested in KP and generated the expected cost-saving results. It is high time to rationalise the existing pension programme and transition to more modern schemes available in developing and developed countries. Last week, Finance Minister Muhammad Aurangzeb proposed to raise the retirement age from 60 to 65 years. It has sparked controversy over whether the government intends to benefit only a select few individuals. This decision has both advantages and disadvantages. In KP, the age restriction was raised to 63 years in 2019 with a projected annual savings of Rs20bn. However, the decision was reversed due to strong protest from bureaucrats, and the court also overturned the decision. However, KPs other pension reforms remained in effect. KP Advisor on Finance Muzzammil Aslam has a different take on raising the age restriction than his predecessor, who implemented a series of reforms. Mr Aslam believes that the lump sum payment of pension payments will be delayed for the next five years, providing some breathing room for the time being. This will allow the government to show a lower budget deficit. The net impact will increase when the five-year allowances are added to the basic salary, which will be used to pay the pension. The age extension will postpone payments, but total payouts to employees will climb over the following five years. While these efforts provide some relief in the short term, crucial steps must be implemented to address the increasing pension liabilities. The governments liabilities have jumped from Rs25bn in FY03 to Rs2tr in FY24 There is another idea to tax pensions. It may also face political challenges. However, the KP government has imposed a 5pc pension tax on grades 17 and above on their executive allowance. It is estimated that this measure alone will generate Rs150bn in contributions to a pay-as-you-go pension system. This was not an easy decision, but it was made in KP to obtain some contribution from existing employees. The federal government can look into this step in response to opposition to taxing pensions. KP reforms In 2004, based on recommendations from a World Bank project, the India implemented a national pension scheme wherein employee contributions are matched by the government. Pakistan did not choose to adopt it since it was not anticipated that the cost would rise so dramatically over the next 20 years. Taimur Khan Jhagra, former finance minister of KP, took the lead in implementing a series of pension reforms, including the introduction of a contributory pension scheme for new employees beginning July 1, 2022. Few substantial changes were made to the existing pension programme. A well-known 13-tier pension system was in place, covering the pensioners widow, children, parents, siblings, sisters, and grandchildren. KP confined it to direct dependents. The federal government did the same last year, but other provinces have not followed suit. The previous PTI government raised KP and Punjabs minimum retirement age to 55 from 45, reducing KPs pension bill by Rs20bn alone. KP consolidated various pensions into a single one. Previously, individuals could receive two pensions simultaneously, with an active employee receiving both a salary and a pension. The major reform is the implementation of a contributing pension scheme for new employees. Under this programme, the KP government contributes 12pc and employees contribute 10pc. So far, 40,000 staff have been hired under this system starting July 1, 2022. There are additional critical reforms that the KP and federal governments should implement, such as revisiting the single Universal Pay Scale between Grades 1 and 22. Pay in provinces is decoupled from the Centre and between departments, allowing each department to develop a pay scale appropriate for their budget and the market value of their professions. Pension reforms are greatly needed. The question is whether the state will be able to sustain pension payments for the next 10 to 15 years. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : SMOKERS CORNER: KHAN AND THE GENERALS
Description : In May 2023, a recorded phone call  allegedly between the mother-in-law of the former Chief Justice of Pakistan (CJP) Umar Atta Bandial, and the wife of a lawyer-member of Imran Khans populist Pakistan Tehreek-i-Insaf (PTI)  was leaked on social media. In the call, the two ladies can be heard criticising the coalition government made up of the parties that had ousted Khans regime in April 2022 through an act of parliament. At one point in the leaked conversation, the mother-in-law laments, Yeh kambakht martial law bhi tau nahin lagaatay! [These cursed people dont even impose martial law!] Bykambakht,she meant the military establishment (ME). The conversation was surreal on many levels. Khan had been the blue-eyed boy of the ME, until he had a falling out with his makers. From 2011 till he was elected as prime minister in 2018, the ME had successfully shaped Khans political rise in a highly coordinated manner. His popularity was first established within the rank and file of the military. Then, some TV journalists were brought on board, followed by the induction of some vital members of the judiciary.
This troika  the ME, the electronic media and the judiciary  was complimented by the trained social media wing of Khans PTI to proliferate narratives pitched against the two older mainstream parties, the Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) and the Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP). The two were deeply demonised as being corrupt. After his ouster, Imran Khan was convinced that the establishment had betrayed him, and the May 9-10 protests last year were an attempt to rally support amongst pro-Khan factions in the military. However, any military intervention was drastically overestimated by his supporters A constituency that had initially been built by the former military dictator Gen Pervez Musharraf, and which mostly consisted of middle-class and upper-middle-class Pakistanis, was navigated by the ME and the media in such a manner that it eventually fell in Khans lap. This became a quadrilateral elite, comprising the ME, the media, the judiciary and the middle classes. After Khans ouster in April 2022, he began to publicly lambast the ME, accusing it of betraying him. But the truth is, due to the many abject failures of Khans government, the ME had begun to gradually distance itself from him months before he was ousted. In February 2022, Bandial became the CJP. He was cut from the same cloth that at least four of his predecessors were. These included Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry and, even more so, Justice Saqib Nasir, Justice Asif Khosa and Justice Gulzar Ahmad. Anti-PTI parties often accused them of being overtly pro-Khan. Justice Bandial was accused of having a soft corner for Khan. Truth is, Bandial wasnt very good at hiding this soft corner. Now the question is, during the time of the aforementioned phone call leak, when Khan was holding angry rallies and condemning the ME, why was Bandials mother-in-law yearning for a military takeover? Equally surreal was the presence of banners in some pro-Khan rallies with We Want Martial Law written on them. Also, why did the PTI  by planning last years violent riots on May 9 and 10, in which PTI supporters and members attacked military property  believe that this would cause a split in the armed forces and bring pro-Khan generals to power? Many academics who study coups are of the view that, if the conditions allow, street protests can be followed by a coup detat. According to the political scientist Scott A Tyson, protests are often a signal to the elites to intervene.
The elites in this context are the military and political elites. These may also include the higher judiciary and business elites. A regime facing the protests, too, is made up of political elites. Once the anti-regime elites decide that the protests are clearly signalling for an intervention, this is then communicated to the state elites. The media too plays a role in this. Its reporting of the protests may strengthen the signal and galvanise the military to intervene. The mother-in-laws kambakht lament was expressing a desperate yearning within sections of economic elites for military intervention. This nature of signalling was loud and clear on numerous WhatsApp groups when Khan was holding rallies against his ouster. The signal became even more obvious when the We Want Martial Law banners began to appear at the rallies. Some media personnel also started enhancing the signal to the ME. But by late 2022, the MEs top leadership had changed. A general who had earlier exited the project that was set up to facilitate Khans rise became the new army chief. Yet, PTI believed that many remnants of the project were still active within the military. I believe that with the judiciary still in facilitation mode, the notion of causing a split within the military to replace the new military chief with pro-Khan generals was the brainwave of some retired military men who were well-versed in the theories of post-protest coups. Once the signal to intervene in Khans post-ouster rallies was ignored by the new ME, a violent uprising was conceived that was to target the new ME. The uprising was enacted to evoke the concerns of the supposed pro-Khan generals. The signal now was: eject the new army chief and intervene (on the side of Khan) to avoid an all-out civil war. This plan could not have been formulated without the input of some retired officers. Many of them had been quite vocal in their support for Khan.
The violent May 9 and 10 protests were orchestrated by a political elite (PTI) against another set of elites (the coalition government) to signal the need for an intervention to judicial and military elites. But, according to Tyson, whether or not a coup will succeed is generally not certain to elites. This uncertainty is caused by the uncertainty regarding the actions of other elites. The other elite, in the context of the May 9 and 10 riots, was the military. An intervention by pro-Khan officers was drastically overestimated by the planners and the plan collapsed. The coalition government was able to withstand the assault. The new military chief began to swiftly oust the remaining pro-Khan elements from the military  even though those remaining in the judiciary are now trying to avoid suffering a similar fate through a pushback in the name of the independence of the judiciary.This, too, is quite surreal. Published in Dawn, EOS, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : A turbulent 2023
Description : PAKISTAN faced a tumultuous year in 2023 marked by severe economic distress and a sharp erosion of civil liberties. As documented in the HRCPs annual report, the year was nothing short of a human rights crisis on multiple fronts. Economic hardship was pervasive, with back-breaking inflation  nearly 40pc  and low growth hitting the common citizen the hardest. Protests were widespread, ranging from government employees striking against delayed salaries and pension issues to political demonstrations demanding timely elections. The state responded with indifference and sometimes outright violence, underlining its disregard for the peoples constitutional rights. The political arena was no less strained: the year saw unprecedented violence following the arrest of former prime minister Imran Khan; subsequent PTI-led riots were met with harsh government crackdowns. This included mass arrests and the controversial use of military courts for civilian trials. Political dissent was stifled and freedom of speech curtailed with internet shutdowns and media gags on reporting of certain political leaders. Sadly, the governments management of the turmoil involved significant overreach, impacting judicial independence and skewing the electoral landscape. The swift passage of laws granting sweeping powers to intelligence agencies and restricting media freedoms points to the governments alarming propensity to consolidate power at the cost of transparency and accountability.
Human rights violations were not limited to political suppression. The report highlights severe abuses such as enforced disappearances, alleged extrajudicial killings and custodial torture by state agencies. The societal impact of these policies and actions has been devastating. Moreover, marginalised communities, including women, children, religious minorities, and transgender persons, faced increased violence and discrimination. Notable too was the harsh crackdown on peaceful assemblies like the Baloch Yakjehti Councils protests. On the international front, despite engaging with global human rights mechanisms, Pakistans selective adherence to recommendations concerning enforced disappearances and the use of the death penalty reflected a reluctance to fully align with international human rights standards. Rulers would do well to remember that adhering to those standards will help maintain Pakistans desperately needed GSP-Plus status and be a more inviting place for foreign investment.
As the year proceeds, it is imperative for the state to reconsider its approach to human rights. The government must ensure the independence of the judiciary, respect for democratic processes, and protection for all citizens against the abuse of power. Laws that infringe on freedom of expression and assembly should be reviewed and reformed. Additionally, there should be a concerted effort to address the economic inequalities that underpin much of the social unrest. For a stable and prosperous Pakistan, human rights must be more than an ideal; they must be an integral part of governance and everyday life. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Love knows no boundaries at Karachis Edhi Home nursery for special children
Description : KARACHI: Its one day to Mothers Day and the childrens nursery at the Edhi Home in Mithadar is decorated with balloons and posters along with framed photographs of the late couple Abdul Sattar Edhi and Bilquis Edhi. Children in the classrooms are busy making greeting cards, drawing pictures of themselves and the only woman whom they have come to know as their mother, their Chhoti (younger) Mummy Sabah Faisal Edhi. The duties of the busy mother of so many children, including four of her own, starts from early morning. After tending to her own household duties and sending off her youngest, Moosa Edhi, to school, she is in the nursery at 8am sharp, inquiring from the staff there if everyone had a good sleep, if anyone had any issues during the night. It has become a habit with her to visit the nursery first to inquire about her babies before getting to her other work of calling up the other Edhi Homes and Centres, asking about the other children, their health and school progress, asking about the women in their Homes, tending to the marriage proposals, and adoption procedures and planning outings and picnics for the children. When parents discover their babies are not well, they quietly leave them in our cot, says Sabah Edhi as country celebrates Mothers Day today But today, before she can go inside the nursery, she stops in the playroom to admire three-year-old Fatimas greeting her with a broad smile and a happy dance. Chhoti Mummy hugs the child and gestures to know if she has eaten breakfast. Fatima is deaf and mute. She has only recently been fitted with a cochlear implant, which has enabled her to hear and appreciate music to which she loves to dance. It is quite obvious that Sabahs favourite in the nursery is five-year-old Moosa, named by Mummy, Bilquis Edhi, herself, after her own youngest grandson, Sabah and Faisals youngest son Moosa. But this Moosa, even though he is five, doesnt look more than a year old. His growth is stunted. Sabah lifts him out of his cot and cuddles him lovingly. The nursery only has special children or children with learning disabilities. Moosa was the last child here named by Bilquis Edhi. The rest have been given names by their Chhoti Mummy. There are two newborn baby girls, Aimen and Noor Fatima, peacefully sleeping in their cradles in the cheerful blue nursery. Both the babies are blind. The moment some parents discover that all is not well with their babies they quietly leave them in our cot, says Sabah. They never return for them, she sighs. Parents of very sick children, too, disown them even when they know that their child doesnt have much time to live. We take them in, find them the best of medical care till the last of their breath, she adds. On discovering a child in the cot, we first try to get information about who left him or her there followed by a thorough medical check-up. If they are in need of medical care, we make sure that they receive the best that there is. Just the other day, someone left a little girl suffering from diarrhoea. She had to be hospitalised, she informs. Just then one little girl, of about four years of age, who also looks like she is considerably attached to her Chhoti Mummy walks in and runs up to her. She is normal. There is nothing wrong with this one, Sabah says. She says her name is Manahil. We found her near Sohrab Goth. Most of the children in our Sohrab Goth Centre are much older so I brought her here with me until we can find her parents, she informs. By the grace of God, there is no shortage of space, love and care in this Home built for these children by Edhi Sahab and Mummy, she says, kissing the childs head. All children are a blessing, a priceless gift from God. I wish the parents who discard their children like or neglect them would realise this. I wish such parents could love their special, disabled or sick children like they love their normal children, she says. Sometimes, these very children who they love so much because they are normal and healthy grow up to discard their parents when they are old and weak. Thats the story of so many old people in our homes, she concludes. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Documentary on Dr Aafia Siddiqui launched in Karachi
Description : KARACHI: Aafia Siddiqui  The True Story, a documentary by Friends of Aafia, was launched here at the Karachi Press Club (KPC) on Saturday. The documentary shed light on various aspects of the life of Dr Aafia from her birth, education, marriage and to her kidnapping in Karachi and confinement in a notorious US prison.
View this post on Instagram
Aafias sister Dr Fowzia Siddiqui and Muslim Matters Editor-in-chief Hena Zuberi and others spoke at the event. Dr Fowzia said that her sister Dr Aafia was a gifted child, a bright scholar and a loving and caring person. She got a PhD degree in neurosciences from Brandies University of the US and it was her dream to revolutionise education system in Pakistan. In the documentary, human rights lawyer Clive Stafford Smith, who currently represents Dr Aafia, said a vast majority of the American people had no idea who Dr Aafia was and they also did not care.
He said that she has suffered a lot in the US prison and braved all sorts of torture. El-Hajj Mauri Saalakhan, the founding president and director of operations at The Aafia Foundation, told the documentary makers that after 9/11, the US targeted the human rights and liberties of people, especially Muslims. He said Dr Aafia also fell prey to this victimisation and in 2003 she was kidnapped, along with her children, in Karachi and got disappeared on mere suspicion that her husband had bought online night vision goggles. Umme Muhammad, the president of the Musawemem Campaign, said for the last 15 years she had been linked to the case of Dr Aafia but disappointingly nothing more could be achieved.
She said Dr Aafia was targeted only because she was Muslim. Yvonne Ridley was amongst the first investigative journalists who told the world that Dr Aafia was jailed in Afghanistan. Talking about the grey lady prisoner of Bigram jail, she said in those times the US administration would dehumanise the prisoners and the same was done to Dr Aafia. She was wounded by the US soldiers and in injured condition she was brought to the US and tried by a court in a highly biased manner and jailed for long 86 years, which means the rest of her life. Zeina El-Debis, leader of the Friends of Aafia and founder of the Shade of Mercy Foundation, talked about their efforts to get Dr Aafia repatriated on humanitarian grounds. She said the documentary was also a part of such efforts. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Situationer: Riverine region in the crosshairs of militia violence
Description : DESPITE a year-long anti-dacoit operation in upper Sindhs riverine area, the dacoit factor remains an enigma for the provincial police. The situation took a new turn on May 5 when the Bugtis, allegedly backed by the Punjab police and equipped with military-grade weapons, infiltrated the riverine area of Rwanti in Ghotki, which lies on the Sindh-Punjab border, adding a new layer of complexity to the ongoing operation. The recent incident has once again laid bare the seeming helplessness of the Sindh police, sparking outrage among the provinces intelligentsia. The scourge of dacoits has long plagued parts of northern Sindh, with the governments efforts to eradicate them yielding little success. Despite continued endeavours to tackle the issue, the desired results remain elusive. The Kalpar Bugtis, led by their chief Jalal Kalpar Bugti, claimed to have exacted revenge for the murder of his 30-year-old son, Abdul Rehman Kalpar, by killing two prominent dacoits from the Shar community and injuring half a dozen others. The incident occurred in the Machhko police station area, which falls under the jurisdiction of the Punjab police. The dacoits killed were identified as Alim alias Almo Shar, brother of Sanu Shar, and Hakim alias Haku Shar. Rehman Kalpar was ambushed and killed by dacoits on Feb 13 while he was travelling on the CPEC road in Ghotki district. Jalal Kalpar reached out to the Sindh police, seeking their assistance in avenging his sons murder, according to a senior police officer familiar with the situation. Dacoit issue remains an enigma for Sindh police Jalal Kalpar is unapologetic and straightforward in justifying his actions. I repeatedly reached out to the Ghotki police, but they ignored me. I went to perform Umrah, and upon my return, I was approached by the Punjab police to liaise with them and see how things work, he told Dawn over phone from Sui in Balochistan.
Jalal alleged that Ghotki police SSP Anwar Khetran made excuses, claiming that his force was outgunned by the dacoits, as they only had G-3 and Kalashnikov rifles. However, he added, Mr Khetran did acknowledge that geo-fencing evidence had confirmed the involvement of the Shar community in his sons murder. Punjab police sought help from me in terms of human resource and police would lead the offensive. My men were there as a cover. Finally, Shars were killed in Machko police limits of Punjab. Sindh police didnt do anything in this offence, Jalal alleged. Jalal Kalpar hails from those Bugti families who defied the late Nawab Akbar Bugti and were subsequently displaced from Dera Bugti, settling in Sindh. Following Rehmans killing, Jalal declared at a jirga in Sui that he would hold accountable those responsible, specifically targeting Shaharyar Shar, the chieftain of the Shar clan and a former PTI leader who later joined PPP. In an attempt to defuse the situation, Shar reached out to Jalal to clarify his position and maintain neutrality. Jalal conveyed message to Shaharyar that if Abid Hussain Jatoi, Abid Sundrani, or Gul Mohammad Jakhrani stand surety for him, only then will he talk to him. Only Gul Mohammad agreed, and he, along with Shaharyar, met Kalpar at his Sukkur residence, but names of Rahib Khan Shar and Sana Shar emerged as those responsible for Rehmans murder, a police officer said. Police post as Bugtis base A former SSP of Ghotki said that before the May 5 incident, Bugtis had started arriving in areas along the Sindh-Punjab border. They [Bugtis] wanted Bhaya-4 police post vacated by Sindh police. This post is manned by Ghotki police, but the area falls in Punjabs territorial limits. As they wanted to use this post as their operational base, but didnt find Ghotki police forthcoming in their response, so they turned to Punjab police eventually, said the officer. According to him, the Punjab police permitted the Bugtis to utilise the Camp-2 location, which was situated approximately 800 metres from Sanu Shars hideout. Its an ideal location from which they can confront the Shars comfortably, the officer added. Viral video images revealed that the Bugtis, armed with prohibited and military-grade weapons, disembarked from APCs in the katcha area. The ensuing gun battle, which lasted a couple of days, resulted in the deaths of two Shars and injuries to several others. The Bugtis then departed. According to a former SSP of Shikarpur, the military-grade weapons used were of 82mm dimension, a type commonly seen in Afghanistan. Dangerous precedent Professor Inam Shaikh, an analyst, says, The incident has set a dangerous precedent. He urges the Supreme Court to take suo motu notice. How can state collaborate with private persons? It amounts to creating private militia which otherwise means civil war. Supreme Court must step in to take action against police authorities and criminals for this illegal act, he insists. Naseer Memon, a writer, has analysed the situation from the perspective of good dacoits, bad dacoits and the economy of the katcha area. The recent episode of allowing one tribe to attack another in the katcha area can snowball this crime into a tribal warfare. This can flare up a bloodbath, he says. He believes that a multi-stakeholder economy, operating behind the scenes, drives the dacoits, kidnapping, and ransom industry in upper Sindh. A police official reveals that Rahib Shar has been primarily responsible for the kidnapping of people on the CPEC road and other areas. Meanwhile, Sanu Shar has been running a honey trap industry in the riverine area. According to another police officer, Rahib Shar is residing in Sindhs riverine area, while Sanu Shar is based in Punjabs limits. Actually, there is a strip of riverine land stretching over around 3-4km that falls in Sindh but administratively looked after by Rahim Yar Khan administration. Since Punjab police dont pay heed to this area much and Sindh police also remain inactive, it has become a sort of no mans land and a safe haven for outlaws, claims an SSP from lower Sindh. Bugtis aim to target Shars as a community, while the actual culprits, Rahib Shar and Sanu Shar, remain out of their reach. After the July 28, 2023, killing of notorious dacoits Janu Indher, Soomar Shar, Shahzado Dashti, Nazar Mohammad alias Nazroo alias Kato Shar, and Mubashir alias Mushir Indhar, the Sindh police chief was initially reluctant to take a position. However, the Sindh police later claimed credit for the operation. Meanwhile, the Punjab police also staked their claim. Nevertheless, the Sindh police asserted their right to the head money of Rs8.5 million fixed by the government against Janu, Soomar, and Shahzado. After the Bugtis onslaught on the Shars, Sanu Shar uploaded a video clarifying that he was not involved in Rehmans murder. However, this failed to appease Jalal Kalpar, who has temporarily withdrawn from the area but remains resolute in his vow to take on the Shars until Rehmans murderers are killed. I have no issues with Sindh or the Sindhi people, nor did I have any enmity with the Shars as a community. It is the Ganderi Shars, specifically Sannu, Moriyo, Jamal, and Rahib, who are responsible for my sons murder. So, my quest for vengeance is far from over, he declared. Despite repeated messages and calls, Ghotki SSP Sumair Noor Channa remained unavailable to explain whether criminal cases have been lodged in this regard. Similarly, Rahim Yar Khan SSP Rizwan Gondal did not reply to questions about how Punjab police are backing private militias to take on outlaws. A message was also sent to Sindh IG Ghulam Nabi Memon to get his side of the story, but no contact could be established with him. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Ruling coalition loses 27 reserved seats in Punjab
Description :  Speaker suspends PML-Ns 23, PPPs two, and one member each of PML-Q, IPP
 Decision announced on point of order raised by PTI-backed SIC leader
 In National Assembly, ruling coalition also likely to lose 23 seats ahead of budget session LAHORE / ISLAMABAD: The ruling coalition in Punjab led by PML-N on Friday lost dozens of reserved seats in the provincial assembly when the speaker suspended 24 women and three minority MPAs elected on reserved seats and barred them from joining the house proceedings. Twenty-three of the suspended MPAs belonged to PML-N, two to PPP and one each to PML-Q and IPP. Speaker Malik Mohammad Ahmed Khan took the decision on a point of order raised a day ago by opposition lawmaker Rana Aftab of PTI-backed Sunni Ittehad Council (SIC) during the house proceedings. The opposition member had argued that the Supreme Court had suspended the decision of the Election Commission of Pakistan (ECP) of allocating the reserved seats of SIC to other parties on the plea that the SIC had neither contested elections nor had submitted a list of nominees for the seats reserved for women and minorities. But Speaker Khan ruled that he had sought opinions of the advocate general as well as the provincial law department and would take a decision only on receiving their reports. Soon after the beginning of house proceedings on Friday, the speaker read out the Supreme Court order and gave the ruling that Rana Aftabs point of order was lawful and suspended the 27 members immediately. When Mr Aftab pointed out that the suspended MPAs had unlawfully voted for the resolution condemning May 9 violence, the chair said he should have raised the issue when the resolution had been put to vote a day ago. The women MPAs suspended were Maqsoodan Bibi, Rubina Nazir, Salma Zahid, Kanwal Nauman, Zeba Ghafoor, Saeeda Samreen Taj, Sheharbano, Amna Parveen, Syed Sumera Ahmed, Uzma Butt, Afshan Hussain, Shagufta Faisal, Nasreen Riaz, Sajida Naveed, Farzana Abbas, Mariya Talal, Tasheen Fawad, Abida Bashir, Saeeda Muzaffar, Faiza Monima, Amera Khan, Samiya Ata, Rahat Afza and Rukhsana Shafiq. The minority MPAs were Tariq Masih Gill, Waseem Anjum, and Basroji. National Assembly After the Supreme Courts decision and the Punjab Assembly speakers action, the ruling coalition in the National Assembly is also set to lose nearly two dozen members ahead of the crucial budget session. President Asif Ali Zardari on Friday summoned the National Assembly session on Monday (May 13) and the SIC members are expected to seek a similar ruling from Speaker Ayaz Sadiq. After allocating reserved seats to the parties in the NA in proportion to the general seats won by them in the Feb 8 elections, the Election Commission of Pakistan (ECP) had withheld the notifications on 23 reserved seats  20 for women and three for minorities  due to the dispute on the allocation of the seats after the decision of the PTI-backed independents to join the SIC. Later, the ECP refused to allocate these seats to the SIC and issued notifications distributing these seats to the parties in the ruling coalition headed by the PML-N. The ECP allocated 15 seats reserved for women to the PML-N, four to PPP and one to the JUI-F. It allocated one seat each reserved for the minorities to the PML-N, the PPP and the MQM-P. As a result, PML-N became the largest party in the NA with 123 seats whereas the tallies of PPP and the JUI-F rose to 73 and 11, respectively. The ECP had also issued notifications on the reserved seats for women and minorities in Punjab and the KP assemblies the same day. The PML-N had initially won a total of 75 general seats and was joined by nine independents. With the allocation of 19 reserved seats for women and four reserved seats for minorities, the number reached 107. However, after the March 5 notifications, the PML-N had been allocated 15 out of the remaining 20 reserved seats for women and one out of the three remaining seats reserved for minorities, taking the partys tally to 123 seats. Likewise, PPP had won 54 general seats and was allocated 12 seats reserved for women and two for minorities. After the allocation of four more seats reserved for women and one for minorities on March 5, the number of the PPP lawmakers is now 73, still fewer than the PTI-backed independents who had joined the SIC hoping to get reserved seats. The MQM-Pakistan has 22 members in the National Assembly, while the number of JUI-F lawmakers had gone up to 11 from seven. The SC decision is expected to have no effect in the composition of the Balochistan Assembly as PTI had not won any seat in the province in the Feb 8 polls. However, in the provincial assembly of Sindh, the two reserved seats for women were given to PPP from the share of the PTI-SIC, which had nine members. KP Assembly The most interesting distribution of reserved seats had been observed in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Assembly, where the PTI-backed independents had won 91 seats compared to just 19 seats secured by all other political parties combined. However, the JUI-F, which could get only seven general seats to stay on top among these political parties, was allocated 10 reserved seats for women. Likewise, the PML-N, which won six general seats, was given eight reserved seats. The PPP, which bagged four general seats, was allocated six reserved seats. The ANP and the PTI-P, which clinched one general seat each, also remained lucky to have their numbers double in the provincial assembly. However, these MPAs in KP Assembly have not yet taken oath as the speaker has refused to call the session. Gwadar killings Meanwhile, the Punjab Assembly during its Fridays sitting adopted a resolution condemning the recent killing of 11 workers belonging to Punjab in Gwadar. The resolution presented by treasury members Amjad Ali Javed demanded the federal government arrest the culprits. It also demanded that the centre announce a compensation package for the heirs of the deceased. South Punjab On a point of order raised by opposition MPA Nadeem Qureshi, Punjab Finance Minister Mujtaba Shuja told the house that the south Punjab secretariat was not being wrapped up; rather the officers who had been promoted were being replaced by new appointments. The minister also rejected the stance that the PML-N was against the development of south Punjab and said that the region had been developed the most when incumbent Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif was the chief minister of Punjab. Published in Dawn, May 11th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : PIA staff forgets to put boys body on plane
Description :
SKARDU: Officials of PIA, the Civil Aviation Authority and police try to placate the protesting father of the deceased.Photo by the writer
GILGIT: In a heart-wrenching incident, a PIA flight from Islamabad to Skardu left behind the body of a six-year-old boy at the capitals airport on Friday, while his parents continued their journey, unaware of the shocking mistake. The parents of the deceased boy were shocked and fainted at Skardu airport when they came to know that their sons body had been left behind in Islamabad. Mujtaba, a resident of Katshi village of Kharmang district, was diagnosed with a tumour at a hospital in Skardu and doctors referred him to Rawalpindi for treatment a month ago. His father Muhammad Askari and mother took him to Rawalpindi and he had been under treatment at Benazir Bhutto Hospital for weeks. Mujtaba lost his life in the hospital on Thursday. The parents decided to transport the body of their child to their native village of Katshi for burial, through a PIA flight on Friday, as a 24-hour-long journey from Islamabad to Skardu by road with the body was not possible due to hot weather. Shocked parents, relatives protest against airline managements negligence at Skardu airport The deceased boys parents and another relative confirmed their tickets at flight PK-451 from Islamabad to Skardu on Friday morning. They brought the body to Islamabad airport at 6am and completed cargo procedure for the body after fulfilling SOPs and airlines rules and made the payment. Ibrahim Asadi, a relative of the deceased boy, told Dawn that the body was scheduled to be transported with the parents to Skardu from Islamabad at 9am. He said the flight was delayed for four hours and left Islamabad at 1pm. Upon arrival at Skardu airport at 2pm, the parents were informed that mistakenly the body was not loaded on the plane and left behind at Islamabad airport. The news sparked grief and outrage as parents were shocked and started crying while the boys mother and father fainted at the airport. The relatives of the boy waiting to receive the body also gathered at the airports lounge and started protest against the PIA managements negligence. It continued for three hours. Officials of PIA, Civil Aviation Authority and other departments, who were on duty at Skardu airport, tried to calm down the boys parents and relatives and admitted their mistake. They assured the parents of bringing back the body on Saturday (today). The PIA officials said the company, which handles cargos at the airport, is responsible for not loading the body and assured the parents that action would be taken against it for negligence. The boys parents and relatives chanted slogans against the PIA administration. They said the poor family had paid higher price to transport the body through the PIA flight, but the airline committed a serious negligence. They appealed to the government to take action against those responsible for the negligence. Yousaf Kamal, another relative of the deceased boy, said the body had deliberately not been loaded on the plane. He said Minister for Kashmir Affairs and Gilgit-Baltistan Engr Amir Muqam was scheduled to fly to Gilgit from Islamabad on Friday, adding that the PIA flight from Islamabad to Gilgit couldnt operate due to the bad weather condition. He said the federal minister had changed his plan and decided to go to Skardu and kept the passengers waiting. He said the flight was scheduled to depart from Islamabad at 9am, but was delayed till 1pm to accommodate the minister, leaving the body behind at the airport. Published in Dawn, May 11th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Downside risks for Pakistan remain exceptionally high: IMF
Description : Downside risks for the economy remain exceptionally high, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) said on Friday in its staff report ahead of the governments talks with the fund on a longer term progamme. An IMF mission is expected to visit the country this month to discuss a new programme, ahead of the government beginning its annual budget-making process for the next financial year. Downside risks remain exceptionally high. While the new government has indicated its intention to continue the SBAs (standby arrangement) policies, political uncertainty remains significant, said the fund in its staff report following the second and final review under the SBA.
The fund added that political complexities and high cost of living could weigh on policy, adding that policy slippages, together with lower external financing, could undermine the narrow path to debt sustainability and place pressure on the exchange rate. The IMF also said higher commodity prices and disruptions to shipping, or tighter global financial conditions, would also adversely affect external stability for the cash-strapped nation. The fund stressed the need for timely post-programme external financing disbursements.
Last month, the country completed a short-term $3 billion programme, which helped stave off sovereign default, but Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif has stressed the need for a fresh, longer term programme. Pakistan narrowly averted default last summer and the economy has stabilised after the completion of the last IMF programme with inflation coming down to around 17 per cent in April from a record high 38pc last May. The country is still dealing with a high fiscal shortfall and while the external account deficit has been controlled through import control mechanisms, it has come at the expense of stagnating growth, which is expected to be around 2pc this year compared to negative growth last year. Pakistan is expected to seek at least $6bn and request additional financing from the Fund under the Resilience and Sustainability Trust. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Pakistan remain unbeaten in Azlan Shah Cup as match with New Zealand ends in tie
Description : Pakistan on Friday secured a tie in their match against New Zealand in the 30th Azlan Shah Hockey Cup. Pakistans fifth match today, which was played in Malaysias Ipoh city at 1pm (PKT), saw them remain unbeaten throughout the tournament. The match ended in a draw, with both teams securing one point each, the Pakistan Hockey Federation (PHF) said.
View this post on Instagram
Senior player Ammad Shakeel is leading the 18-member squad with Abu Bakr as the vice-captain. Japan lead the points table with 13 points while Pakistan rank second with 11 points. New Zealand hold the third position with seven points while Malaysia follow them with a point less.
View this post on Instagram
According to the PHF, both Pakistan and New Zealand had not scored by half-time. New Zealand then succeeded in scoring a field goal in the 35th minute of the game. However, Abu Bakr amassed a goal for Pakistan in the 43rd minute while playing at the penalty corner. Pakistan and Japan had already qualified for the final match, which will take place at 5:30pm (PKT) on Saturday at the Azlan Shah Stadium in Ipoh, after winning their respective matches on Wednesday. Pakistan had defeated Canada 5-4 while Japan beat hosts Malaysia 2-1. According to Radio Pakistan, Pakistan have won their three matches against Malaysia, South Korea and Canada while the ones against Japan and New Zealand ended in a draw. Meanwhile, after their 3-1 victory against Canada today, Japan have four wins plus a draw. Earlier this month, head coach Roelant Oltmans had said he expected an improved show by Pakistan in the tournament. Oltmans, 69, has served Pakistans senior and junior teams in different roles since 2004 and was involved with the youth side in his most recent stint. Pakistan won the Azlan Shah Cup title thrice  in 1999, 2000 and 2003  and came third in the last edition which was also held in Ipoh in 2022. Malaysia are the defending champions of this years edition. Addressing the squad via video link, Information Minister Attaullah Tarar reiterated the governments commitment to hockey while also mentioning a campaign across all forms of media to highlight the teams achievements in the Azlan Shah Cup, according to a report from state-run Radio Pakistan. He added that the prime minister would focus on removing obstacles in the development of hockey in Pakistan. Tara said final would be broadcast nationwide tomorrow on Saturday and wished the team luck. The entire nation is praying for the victory of Pakistan and is looking forward to welcome a champion team. Rana Mashood Ahmed, chairman of the Prime Ministers Youth Programme, also congratulated the team for reaching the final after thirteen years. He added that Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif would also host the team on its return and address issues impeding hockeys development in the country. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Who can rock the hybrid boat?
Description : A NUMBER of developments over the past week suggest that the establishment is keen to enforce/ maintain the status quo and the only impediment in its path may be an assertive superior judiciary that has been increasingly finding its feet in recent weeks. If jailed PTI leader and former prime minister Imran Khans article in UKs conservative right-wing Telegraph newspaper blaming the military leadership directly for all his woes the week before was not hint enough of the state of play, two public statements by the latter clarified issues rather unambiguously. The first came in the DG ISPRs press briefing, which was ostensibly called to discuss Afghanistan-based terrorist groups involvement in attacks on Chinese nationals working on development projects in the country. But in response to a couple of questions about the PTI and Imran Khan related to the events of May 9 last year, the DG ISPR stated unequivocally that the only path to rehabilitation for the political party and its leaders was to seek forgiveness for attacking your own forces.
Then, perhaps, talks could happen and that too with political parties (ie, the government), as the military had nothing to do with politics. Imran Khan has been consistent in saying he wouldnt talk to the powerless political parties and that a meaningful dialogue is possible only with the military. The DG ISPR also lamented the delay in the prosecution and sentencing of all those responsible for the May mayhem  including the leaders and mastermind against whom irrefutable evidence has been gathered and submitted  and, in doing so, appeared to hint at the establishments frustrations with what it perceives as roadblocks being erected by the judiciary. The content of the live presser evoked an equally adamant response from the PTI, which went on the offensive, reiterating its stance that May 9 was a false flag operation, accusing the militarys spokesman of being economical with the truth, and saying it would be happy to live with the findings of an impartial judicial commission into the May 9 events and would even apologise if found to be at fault. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. The military spokesman had pre-empted this demand in his briefing earlier by saying if a probe were to happen, as was being demanded, it ought to start with 2014, and not nine years later. The 2014 PTI sit-in in the federal capital was said to have been instigated and backed by the then ISI chief. This was the first indication that the military was prepared to hold its own accountable for past follies, if it paved the way for the trials and sentencing of PTI leaders it says were responsible for the attacks on defence installations in a number of cities in Punjab and KP. While the spokesman left nothing to the imagination, on the first anniversary of May 9, the army chief added his voice to his chief spokesmans in terms of stressing the need for punishing the perpetrators of the violence a year earlier, also lashing out against what he called digital terrorism.
This indicates that harsher curbs on social media are planned. So far, the PTI has had overwhelming social media dominance and had been able to keep a step ahead of its adversaries, but we will find out soon whether it has what it takes to bypass software the Chinese have developed over the years (and Pakistan has reportedly acquired) and successfully used to block dissident content. With this ever-widening gulf between the establishment and the party it once saw as a panacea for all that ails Pakistan, the one thing that many felt could force a rethink in the establishment would have been a public manifestation of the immense support enjoyed by the PTI, as evidenced in last Februarys elections. Many Pakistan watchers keenly waited all day for multitudes of PTI supporters to spill out onto the roads and streets of major urban conurbations on the party leaders call to break the shackles and protest on May 9. But the brutal crackdown of the past one year seems to have knocked the wind out of the partys sails and worn down the workers will. People may turn out to vote for it in droves, but did not appear prepared to risk life, limb and liberty in coming out for mass protests. Some small localised protests did happen, but had zero impact in the sense of influencing decision-making in the corridors of power. Going forward, a couple of factors will play a role in steering developments. The first and foremost will be the confidence the army chief has in his control over his institution. His predecessor appointed a dozen major generals to three stars in his final six weeks in office and left the incumbent little room in terms of forming his own team. Natural attrition and the more dramatic exit of a couple of three stars on disciplinary grounds recently has, 18 months down the line, given the chief an opportunity to place senior officers of his own choosing in key roles which will give him greater freedom of action both inside and outside the institution. The promotion of three officers this week, including the DG ISPR, to three stars was another step in that direction. The military saw May 9 as a coup against the chief, a failed attempt to dislodge him from office. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. With the PTI protests failing to gather momentum, the only impediment in his path seems to be an increasingly assertive superior judiciary. It can and will, in all likelihood, challenge the establishments pre-eminence in decision-making. It isnt clear how the latter plans to deal with that, especially because it believes that a direly needed economic revival is only possible under the umbrella of a hybrid set-up and in a relatively calm political environment. Only the judiciary can rock its boat now. The writer is a former editor of Dawn. abbas.nasir@hotmail.com Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Insurgency and social change
Description : THE recent killing of seven barbershop workers from Punjab in Gwadar is another indicator that the insurgency in Balochistan is evolving and intensifying demographic changes, which will impact the sociopolitical landscape of the province. Although targeted killings of settlers in Balochistan are not a new trend, the emergence of the Balochistan Liberation Army as the primary insurgent group has significantly increased operational capacities and diversified targets.
While the BLA has not officially claimed responsibility for the Gwadar attack, it is likely the act of one of its wings or affiliate groups. Last month, the group carried out a significant attack, killing nine people from central Punjab who were planning on reaching Europe through Iran. Based on their ethnicity, BLA gunmen abducted them from a bus bound for Taftan and later dumped their bodies under a bridge in a hilly area of Noshki. In a similar attack, possibly by the same gunmen, two people were killed when they tried to escape the assailants cordon on N-40, the Quetta-Noshki highway. Following the Noshki attack, the BLA issued a statement claiming that its special squad had killed agents of Pakistans intelligence agencies who, they claimed, were travelling in plain clothes on the bus. However, media reports and investigations later revealed that the victims were using the Balochistan route to travel to Iran and onward to Europe. Baloch militants view workers and travellers from Punjab as collaborators or agents of security forces or the federal government. Attacks targeting Punjabi workers and settlers have occurred in various parts of the province in the past. It appears that the insurgents kill settlers because they are non-combatants and, as such, easy targets. Militant groups assign such tasks to their new recruits to test their conviction and draw them into the cycle of violence. While one can comprehend Baloch grievances against the state institutions and Punjab, it is also crucial to understand why they target non-combatants who have been serving them for years. Whenever anger flares against the states flawed policies, settlers become the targets. Traditionally, Baloch society has a few key professions. Hairdressing is one of the major ones they miss. Teaching comes next, with teachers from Punjab and the Urdu-speaking community making significant contributions to the education sector in the province. Like tribal codes in other parts of the country, the Baloch follow the tradition of hosting members of different ethnicities without integrating them into their tribal ethics. This is a common practice, as assimilation is a long process. The same applies to settlers from Punjab and urban Sindh, who have embraced the norms of Baloch society, while maintaining ties with their native towns and communities.
However, Punjabis constitute the largest ethnic group in the country and wield significant power and resources, leading to resentment not only among the Baloch, but also Pakhtuns and Sindhis. Whenever anger flares against the establishment and the states flawed policies, settlers become the targets of this animosity. Historically, barbers have been the first victims when such hatred triggers violence. It is worth noting that many of these barbers hail from southern Punjab, much of which identifies itself as Baloch, but their official domicile determines their identity and ethnicity. Over the last two decades, Pakhtuns have captured market businesses in urban Balochistan, while Sindhis have gradually become prominent in the labour market. Despite issues of ethnic and tribal pride and sociocultural differences, there has been no hostility towards these communities. This is because both ethnicities are part of Balochistan and share some cultural commonalities. Moreover, both communities have faced major hostility, apart from minor issues related to ethnic and tribal pride and sociocultural differences. The reasons are that both ethnicities are part of Balochistan and share few other cultural commonalities, but both are also seen as deprived communities and, in the past, have remained part of the political struggle for rights. Insurgencies have no room for neutrality or ambiguity, as insurgents seek clear distinctions between friends and foes. In places like Myanmar and India, ethnic insurgents target civilians from minority ethnic groups, as well as engage in property destruction and other abuses. While small ethnic groups may strive to maintain a neutral stance, they often find themselves between insurgents and counterinsurgents in grey areas. This dynamic is evident among Pakhtuns and Sindhis, who have been targeted by insurgents while working on government projects. The contractors had hired them as an alternative to Punjabi labour, but they were not spared despite a sense of affinity with them.
Sociopolitical transformation is a complex phenomenon, which is influenced not only by insurgents but also by internal societal changes. Baloch society is transforming due to rural-to-urban migration, increasing literacy rates, and improved connectivity. Similar to Karachis experience, urbanisation in Quetta is making other major urban centres multi-ethnic too. Despite ethnic bonds with Sindhis, coexistence with Pakhtuns and Sindhis may face occasional challenges. Additionally, religion presents a growing challenge, as religious fervour increases alongside literacy rates among the Baloch. While this may appear advantageous for state institutions seeking cohesion through religion, religiosity has not weakened Balochistans nationalistic sentiments. The promotion of religious organisations and madressahs by state institutions has failed to make a significant impact, mainly due to the vast disparities within Baloch societys tribal, rural, and urban composition, which foster diverse political interests. The very forces undermining peace are now major power players. At the national level, the provinces poor human development and governance indicators leave ample space for resistance politics. Sociopolitical changes often trigger paradoxical sentiments, with simultaneous pro-development and anti-development attitudes emerging. When the sense of deprivation intensifies, and resource distribution becomes contentious, it creates a conducive environment for militants to recruit, expand, and diversify their targets and tactics. Targeting non-combatants of the majority group reflects a deepening societal anger at this level. This is the most crucial level, as the state has to rethink and correct its approach towards Balochistan. The writer is a security analyst. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Indian elections
Description : THE Islamophobic rhetoric being employed by Narendra Modi for this election campaign has become shrill. Pakistan has nearly always been an electoral issue in India. However, this time, it is Indian Muslims who are bearing the brunt of the Indian prime ministers hate speech. Speaking in Rajasthan last month, he called Muslims infiltrators and said they produce too many children. In Gujarat, where, as chief minister, he had overseen the massacre of Muslims in 2002, he accused the Congress of seeking to loot Indias wealth and redistribute it among Muslims, and of organising a vote jihad against his leadership. Later, he accused the Congress and Muslims of stealing Hindu wealth and property.
Modis inflammatory rhetoric was followed by the BJPs campaign video portraying Muslims as outsiders who plundered Indias wealth. As concerns grew about communal violence, the video was removed. These allegations are a sequel to Modis public referencing of earlier conspiracy theories of love jihad (Muslims forcibly converting Hindu women and marrying them to increase the Muslim population) or land jihad (capturing land to construct religious structures and gaining control of Indias territory). Concerns that his rhetoric might incite further violence against Indian Muslims are increasing. Ordinarily, since Hindus are in a majority in India, it may be difficult to question the rationale of creating a Hindu state. However, two observations are in order. One, the expansionist designs of the cherished Hindu state seek the creation of an Akhand Bharat, a Hindu right fantasy, which would violate the territorial integrity of Nepal, Bangladesh, Pakistan, and Afghanistan, as per a map displayed in the new parliament building. This is not acceptable to the aforementioned independent states. Two, though the creation of a Hindu state should not translate into discrimination against minorities, regrettably this will be the case. The works of French political scientist Christophe Jaffrelot illustrate how Muslims, 14.5 per cent of Indias population, are grossly underrepresented in bureaucracy, the judiciary, police, and legislative organs. They are second-class citizens.
The Muslim-majority area of Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmiri is also being subjected to demographic engineering. The destruction of the centuries-old Babri Masjid by Hindu zealots in 1992 and the construction of a temple in its place has set a precedent that might be followed for other historic mosques. This contrasts sharply with the UAEs gesture of permitting a Hindu temple in Abu Dhabi. Modis anti-Muslim rhetoric is raising concerns of violence. Analysts are also pointing out the fascist tendencies of the BJP regime, a steep decline in democratic values, and a departure from the moorings of pluralism and secularism on which modern India was founded. In her book The Incarcerations, Alpa Shah contends that Modis India is using its national security apparatus to incarcerate ordinary citizens for their dissenting views. Commenting on the book, Arundhati Roy stated that this was about criminalisation and incarceration of dissent itself. Strikingly, the Modi regime has also used art and culture to project the Hindutva philosophy. Kunal Purohits book H-Pop: The Secretive World of Hindutva Pop Stars shows how Hindutva pop stars and influencers are being used to spread the message of Hindu supremacy and create acceptance of Hindutvas core beliefs. Apart from this, Modi is playing on his governments accomplishments: making India the worlds fifth largest economy; the construction of 50,000 kilometres of national highways; boosting Indias military spending; building Vikrant, Indias first domestically built aircraft carrier; and the Chandrayaan-3 moon landing. His prospects of winning a third term have been bolstered by a weak opposition. Despite the formation of the Congress-led 37-party INDIA coalition, there is no real challenge. What has bolstered his outreach is Indias enhanced global standing. In his book Why Bharat Matters, S. Jaishankar presents India as a leader of the global south and makes a case for the rejuvenation of India as a civilisational state.
There are some lessons that Pakistan could learn from Indias electoral process. One, despite the large scale of Indias elections (969 million registered voters; 1m polling stations) and the use of electronic voting machines, election results are largely accepted without much ado. Two, there is no caretaker government, as the incumbents become caretakers in a way, and refrain from announcing major policy decisions or sanctioning expenditure for development schemes. If Modi wins a third term, he is likely to maintain his pro-Hindutva, anti-Muslim, and hegemonic attitude towards regional countries, particularly Pakistan. The write is a former foreign secretary and chairman of Sanober Institute Islamabad. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : The lethal troika
Description : MANY factors were responsible for the defeat of the erstwhile Soviet Union and then the US in Afghanistan. A common factor was the existence of a combination of extremely resilient militant groups resisting both superpowers. This combination consisted of three categories of militants: local Afghan militants resisting foreign invaders; Pakistani militants crossing over to help their Afghan brethren; and thousands of mujahideen from various countries, particularly in the Middle East, participating in the Afghan jihad. With some variations in their composition, role and external supporters, they fought together against the US and USSR for 30 years, forcing them to withdraw. Alarmingly, after the US withdrawal from Afghanistan in 2021, this Afghanistan-based lethal troika now targets Pakistan. The situation necessitates a fundamental shift in the terrorist threat assessment in Pakistan  from focusing exclusively on the Tehreek-i-Taliban Pakistan to broadening the threat calculus to the troika of the TTP, Afghan Taliban, and Al Qaeda. Concerning the nexus between the Taliban and TTP, the latest UN report on Afghanistan states that the Afghan government was supplying weapons, training facilities and regular financial packages to the TTP. Al Qaedas primary goal, after lying low in the region for many years, is to revive itself without annoying its Afghan hosts or attracting the Wests adverse attention. In view of this, it seems to have opted to carry out its activities in Pakistan through the TTP, while staying below the international radar. The importance Al Qaeda gives to the TTP is evident in that it selected 15 of its commanders to assist the group conduct terrorist attacks in Pakistan. It also supplied armed fighters to the TTP in its attack in Chitral in September 2023, which killed four security officials. Al Qaedas camp in Kunar, headed by Hakim ul Masri, is responsible for training suicide bombers for the TTP. The TTP, which has been the most lethal terrorist group in Pakistan over the last three years, is on the same page with the Taliban and Al Qaeda not only because of an ideological affinity and a shared history of fighting foreign invaders in Afghanistan, but also due to similar goals of Sharia enforcement in Pakistan. The TTP intends to replicate in Pakistan what the Taliban did in Afghanistan. There were reports of the TTP helping the other two members of the troika by killing Taliban members defecting to the rival Islamic State-Khorasan Province in Afghanistan. The basic point is that while the troika is united on targeting Pakistan, the members play different roles. The Taliban are likely to help TTP discreetly in Afghanistan by providing sanctuary, with Al Qaeda supporting both openly in Afghanistan through mentoring and in Pakistan through its sympathisers. With its edge, the TTP is likely to carry out ground attacks in Pakistan and lead a campaign to build up its narrative of violent extremism. As far as the strategy and tactics to be adopted by the troika go, the TTP intends to replicate in Pakistan what the Taliban did in Afghanistan. In a recent interview to Khorasan Diary, TTP ameer Noor Wali Mehsud stated, our jihad in Pakistan  has entered a decisive phase. He went on to say ominously: Pakistani security agencies have unjustly occupied our homeland and our goal is to liberate our homeland and implement the divine law. In a nutshell, the TTP seems to be falling back on the two-point narrative of resistance in Afghanistan, ie, liberation of homeland and enforcement of divine laws. This brings us to the likely impact of the troika on the terrorist threat landscape in Pakistan. Since 2021, the number of terrorist attacks in Pakistan has been consistently increasing every year. This is likely to continue in 2024, with three possible changes. One, the number of Afghan nationals taking part in terrorist attacks in Pakistan may increase  we recall here the suicide bombing against military personnel in 2023 in Bannu by Afghans. Two, given its penchant for high-profile attacks, Al Qaeda may train the TTP to carry out such attacks. Three, given that the top Al Qaeda and Taliban instructors will train TTP members, the quality and sophistication of the attacks in 2024 are likely to be enhanced. Another area likely to be impacted by the troika is infiltration. Earlier, in the 1990s, Al Qaeda infiltrated educational institutions such as Karachi and Punjab universities to recruit educated youth. These recruitment cells in universities may be reactivated. Also, to stay abreast of latest government planning in counterterrorism, the TTP, like the Taliban did in Afghanistan, may attempt to infiltrate government departments, including intel agencies. The third and most important dimension of infiltration is that of the military, which was carried out by Al Qaeda in Pakistan in the late 1990s. It may be pertinent to mention that the last attempted terrorist attack by Al Qaeda was in 2014 in Karachi, when a group of naval officers tried to hijack a navy frigate and crash into a US ship in the open seas. Al Qaeda worked somewhat openly in Pakistan from the 1980s to 2001, and built up an elaborate network of civilian volunteers in many cities of Pakistan, who assisted in collecting funds, recruiting volunteers, and providing hideouts for the group. These sleeper cells might again be contacted by it and reactivated. Similarly, there were some Pakistani militant organisations of the 1980s, like the Harkatul Mujahideen, Lashkar-e-Taiba, etc, sympathetic to Al Qaeda and lying low these days. Al Qaeda may re-establish contact with them and get their support for the TTP. Finally, both the Taliban and Al Qaeda are known for their high-quality propaganda campaign. The TTP media wing lacks that finesse. In the light of guidance from the Taliban and Al Qaeda, we are likely to witness a significant improvement in the quality of propaganda. As Sun Tsu stated, if you know your enemy and you know yourself, you need not fear the result of a hundred battles. Sadly, it seems that Pakistan is erring in assessing the collective capabilities of the TTP, supported by the Taliban and Al Qaeda. The writer is a former police officer who was Nactas first national coordinator. Published in Dawn, May 11th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : No such thing as strategic state-owned enterprises, says Finance Minister Aurangzeb
Description : Finance Minister Muhammad Aurangzeb on Sunday said that there was no such thing as strategic state-owned enterprises (SOEs) as he stressed the need for privatisation. He made the remarks at a pre-budget conference in Lahore, two days after  Deputy Prime Minister Ishaq Dar said the government would limit its business only to strategic and essential SOEs under its domain but their number would be reduced from 40 after scrutiny. Chairing the Cabinet Committee on Privatisation (CCoP) meeting, which was attended by the finance minister, Dar said privatisation of loss-making SOEs would be a priority. The meeting noted that 40 SOEs were currently categorised as strategic or essential, but respective ministries would submit their details to the Cabinet Committee on State-Owned Enterprises (CCoSOE). The CCoSOE will determine the status of the SOEs to be categorised as strategic or essential entities. Speaking on Sunday, Aurangzeb said: There is no such as [a] strategic SOE. Talking about the meeting chaired by Dar on Friday, he continued, We are absolutely on the same wavelength  that there is no such thing as a strategic SOE. The finance minister said that a meeting would be held tomorrow where we will go back to various ministries and say that all this should be handed over to the private sector. There will be public-private partnership and we will accelerate the privatisation agenda, he said. Commenting on concerns regarding the privatisation of Pakistan International Airlines (PIA), Aurangzeb said the government was not just looking at foreign investors. They are local and foreign investors who are bidding [] there is no such thing that we are only looking at foreign investors, he said. Commenting on a fresh loan programme with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) programme, he said that a larger and longer programme was needed to bring permanence in macroeconomic stability and structural reforms. He also talked about energy reforms, saying that there were leakages and stressed the need for stopping theft. He said that changes were being brought to the boards of distribution companies (Discos) in order to bring in those from the private sector for better corporate governance. And then you will see how we bring those Discos towards concessions or privatisation or a combination of both, he emphasised. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : ADB links support with IMFs clean chit
Description :   Given my interactions with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the dialogue decisiveness of the current government, I feel very hopeful that there will be a successor programme from the Fund, said the Asian Development Banks (ADB) Country Director for Pakistan Yong Ye in an exclusive interview on the sidelines of ADBs 57th Annual Meeting in Tbilisi this week. Tacitly indicating that support from ADB would only be possible with a clean chit from the Fund, Mr Ye expressed cautious optimism for the economy. Highlighting the uncertainties from last year, Mr Ye termed the IMF agreement announced in June as a miracle. Since then, however, he said, the caretaker government did a good job stabilising the economy under the Funds Stand-By Arrangement. More importantly, he added, with the IMF agreement in place, the central banks foreign exchange reserves increased from $4.4 billion to over $9bn in the week ending on May 3. While the country may still be in the ICU, its immediate liquidity crisis has been sorted, and default has been avoided. This has given some confidence to the markets, he said. Record highs of PSX Commenting on the frequent new highs of the Pakistan Stock Exchange (PSX), Mr Ye observed that previously, when the eurobond payment was due, there had been a lot of hype in the media with speculations about whether the country would be able to repay or default. Such pieces did not induce courage and the markets started fluctuating, contributing to a fluctuating exchange rate. Banks top official says Pakistan has sorted out immediate liquidity crisis, but still in ICU This time around, in April, when the $1bn eurobond payment was due, it was paid without fanfare, indicating much better market confidence. Other positive indicators, such as a narrowing external account deficit and recovering remittances, have also improved investor confidence. However, fiscal deficit challenges remain. One major reason behind them is the high interest rate and high debt servicing burden. Act on what you know In my first meeting with Finance Minister Muhammad Aurangzeb, he showed his commitment to implementing and acting on reforms, said Mr Ye. Pakistan does not need more economic prescriptions, he said, agreeing with the finance ministers recent statements. He said the general perception is that Pakistan knows what it needs to do but never does it. Act on what you know needs to be done. He emphasised that the ADB management wants to be with the government in this difficult time. The agency understands the need to ensure that the debt is sustainable rather than an added burden that does not remove the constraints the country is facing. While the economy is recovering, there is still uncertainty moving forward. The removal of this uncertainty depends very much on the governments commitment and ability to implement economic and structural reforms. A special arrangement Mr Ye emphasised the importance of investment in reviving the economy and the role the Special Investment Facilitation Council (SIFC) could play. My understanding of SIFC is that it is a special arrangement to attract foreign direct investment from some targeted countries, he said. From the ADBs point of view, while the SIFC may be a quick short-term solution, Pakistan still needs to look for long-term systematic solutions to attract foreign direct investment. This would require an overall enabling environment with improved regulations and transparency. Given past unsuccessful incidents such as Reko Diq, SIFC, at least in the short run, can demonstrate the countrys potential and ability for investment, which can then be further broadened for other countries. An important element in attracting FDI is the ability of firms to repatriate profit out of the country. At the moment, investors may believe that while earning money in Pakistan is possible, repatriating profits is challenging. Non-productivity of real estate The country needs to increase its revenue and rationalise expenditures, Mr Ye remarked. As an example, he highlights the real estate sector where a lot of savings are invested. The real estate sector is just financial addition with no value addition. If the country invests in its natural resources instead, the country will start rolling, he said. Inflation is on a downward trend, and if this trend continues, the monetary policy rate will come down, Mr Ye opinioned, resulting in a smaller burden of debt servicing and more fiscal room. This will also unlock the investment and borrowing by the private sector, he hoped. Since there is a lot of pent-up investment demand during the period of high interest rates, Pakistan may enter into a boom cycle when the rates start coming down. But for the revival to be sustainable, it all comes back to reforms, he said.  Remaining pledges While ADB was among the institutions that pledged support after the disastrous floods of 2022, almost the entire amount has yet to be disbursed. ADB had pledged about $1.5bn, of which only $108.79 million has been released according to a media report, with a further $340.9m expected this year. In response to why there has been a delay, Mr Ye said that the amount pledged was for reconstruction and that the process cannot be rushed. The damages have to be assessed along with the ground realities, keeping in mind the new climate risk profile and the possibility that these areas may be flooded again, he said. Pointing out that water was still standing in some areas till the start of this year, Mr Ye said that the new climate risk profile needs to be assessed before the feasibility study. Some roads need to be redesigned, followed by the procurement process, contract award, and finally, disbursement. The entire process is lengthy. Mr Ye identified several critical areas for Pakistans long-term economic growth. These include controlling inflation, reducing the fiscal deficit, and diversifying the export base. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Djokovic bottle strike overshadows Rome Open cruise past Moutet
Description :
SERBIAS Novak Djokovic reacts after being hit on the head by a bottle following his Rome Open match against Corentin Moutet of France at the Foro Italico.Reuters
ROME: Novak Djokovics fast start at the Rome Open was overshadowed on Friday after the tennis icon was struck with a hard plastic water bottle while greeting fans following his 6-3, 6-1 win over Frances Corentin Moutet. World number one Djokovic was left crouched on the ground in agony as the bottle hit him on the back of the head as he was signing autographs while he exited the centre court at the Foro Italico. Djokovic was then led from the arena on foot by security staff who covered the 24-time Grand Slam winner while he made his way into the bowels of the stands. A spokesman for the Italian tennis federation (FITP) told AFP that Djokovic had been taken back to his hotel with a lightly bleeding head and that there is no risk that he will withdraw from the tournament. The spokesman said that Djokovic did not need stitches and that the bottle likely fell while a fan tried to get the players attention, adding that security camera footage is being consulted to help identify the culprit. His condition is not a cause for concern, said organisers in a short statement before then sending media a video in which it appears that the bottle accidentally slipped from a spectators grasp before landing on Djokovics head. Djokovic will face Chiles Alejandro Tabilo in the third round with a great chance to add to his array of titles at the Foro Italico, where only Rafael Nadal has won more with 10. Thank you for the messages of concern, Djokovic wrote on the social media platform X. This was an accident and I am fine resting at the hotel with an ice pack. See you all on Sunday. The Serbian has made no secret in the past that he loves playing in Italy and with a clutch of big names either out injured or struggling he will fancy his chances of a record-extending 41st Masters 1000 crown. One of Djokovics potential threats, third seed Alexander Zverev, breezed into the third round with a 6-0, 6-4 win over Australias Aleksandar Vukic. Both Casper Ruud and Zverev were put on Djokovics side of the draw and German Zverev could face the tournament favourite in the last four after Ruud of Norway was upset in surprising fashion. After sweeping the first set against Serbias Miomir Kecmanovic, Ruud fell 0-6, 6-4, 6-4 on his preferred surface, clay. Ruud once won four clay-court tournaments in a row and was a semi-finalist in Rome in 2020, 2022 and 2023. Ruud was not the only seeded player eliminated on Friday. Portugals Nuno Borges defeated 15th seed Alexander Bublik of Kazakhstan 6-4, 6-4, as Bubliks seven aces were hindered by six double faults. Chinas Zhizhen Zhang knocked out French 19th seed Adrian Mannarino 6-1, 6-3. Italian qualifier Francesco Passaro, ranked just 240th in the world, toppled 23rd seed Tallon Griekspoor of the Netherlands 4-6, 6-3, 7-6 (7/5). Another Italy native, Luciano Darderi, beat 28th-seeded Mariano Navone of Argentina 6-3, 6-2, and Brazilian qualifier Thiago Monteiro upset Australian 32nd seed Jordan Thompson 6-1, 6-3. French qualifier Terence Atmane moved on when 26th seed Lorenzo Musetti of Italy retired down 7-5, 1-0. Eighth seed Grigor Dimitrov of Bulgaria beat Japans Yoshihito Nishioka 7-5, 6-4 while Karen Khachanov of Russia and Francisco Cerundolo of Argentina both won in straight sets. Three American stalwarts are on to the next round. Taylor Fritz, the 11th seed, swept Italian wild card Fabio Fognini 6-3, 6-4; 12th-seeded Ben Shelton rallied for a 4-6, 6-3, 6-4 win over Russias Pavel Kotov; and Sebastian Korda outlasted Italys Flavio Cobolli 7-6 (8/6), 4-6, 6-4. Ons Jabeurs tough 2024 continued after being dumped out of the womens tournament in the second round by Sofia Kenin 7-5, 2-6, 6-4. World number nine Jabeur, who in 2022 became the first Arab player to win a WTA 1000 title, was beaten by unseeded American Kenin in a gruelling match which lasted two hours and 17 minutes in the hot Rome sunshine. Belarusian star Aryna Sabalenka, the tournaments second seed, had a scare of her own but came out on the other side. She defeated American Katie Volynets 4-6, 6-3, 6-2, saving 11 of 16 break points along the way. Fifth seed Maria Sakkari of Greece skated past Frances Varvara Gracheva 6-2, 6-2, and Latvian ninth seed Jelena Ostapenko defeated Russian Anastasia Potapova 6-4, 6-2. Jasmine Paolini, seeded 11th, wasnt as fortunate. Mayar Sherif of Egypt outlasted the Italian crowd-favorite Paolini 7-6 (7/4), 2-6, 6-4 in two hours, 41 minutes. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : STYLE; ALL ABOUT MY MOTHER
Description :   An interview with designers Farah Talib Aziz and Maliha Aziz  the mother-daughter duo headlining the eponymous Farah Talib Aziz FTA label  could very well simply be a fashion feature. From a small business helmed by Farah from the basement of her home to the present day, when it is one of the countrys most coveted bridal brands as well as a titan in the lawn market, the story of FTAs rise could be a case study in the business of fashion. But it is also a human story  of how a woman, who was passionate about creating clothes, decided to make it her career when her eldest son left for university abroad. And then how, eventually, her younger daughter and son joined in, designing and strategising and expanding and advertising, until the FTA stores were packed choc-a-bloc with customers on a daily basis. It is a story about the business of fashion, yes, but it also fits like a glove into the theme of Mothers Day being celebrated today. And so, I sit across from Farah Talib Aziz and Maliha Aziz at the FTA flagship store in Karachis Phase 8 DHA commercial zone.  Dressed head-to-toe in FTA formal wear, theyre the classic interviewees for Mothers Day  finishing each others sentences, reminiscing over the same memories, growing older together and also, working together.  Their mutual passion for design binds Farah Talib Aziz and Maliha Aziz together, as does their love for each other.In the case of this particular mother-daughter power pair,we could perhaps also label them number one boss and employee Farah may have created the label 25-odd years ago but Maliha has also, for many years now, been very much the face of the brand, actively involved in the designing process, interacting regularly with the media, and enthusiastically outlining details of every new collection and campaign. Its a partnership that has worked wonders. Ive been in this space several times before and I am not exaggerating when I say that it has always been crowded. Its always shaadi season or Eid season or I-want-to-splurge-out-on-new-clothes season in Karachis it circles, and the ladies that dominate it tend to be FTA aficionados.  Today, for once, the bridal studio on the first floor where we sit is empty although, by the time we wrap up, I realise that customers have been waiting patiently on another floor for the interview to be over. Would your business have grown as much had you not been joined in it by your children, I ask Farah. No, she replies immediately. I have worked very hard, but there are so many different aspects of this work that are now divided between me and my children.  I have always been very vigilant about quality control, scrutinising every design and watching out for errors. But now, the brand extends over so many different genres of design, from bespoke bridals to ready-to-wear to unstitched lawn. It would be difficult to keep an eye on everything if I didnt have my children helping out. If I am ever occupied with one particular thing, I know that I can delegate the rest of my duties to Maliha and Umar [her son, Umar Aziz] and trust them completely. Mom isnt very business savvy, says Maliha. Her strength lies in the creative aspect of design, so it helps that she has people that she trusts working with her. Farah adds, I was very happy functioning from my homes basement. It was Maliha who kept pushing me to expand and diversify. Maliha nods. My mom would keep telling me not to take on too much responsibility by opening a store. I told her that we wouldnt know whether we could manage it unless we gave it a try. Eventually I convinced her to set up an additional workshop. From there, we expanded to a retail store in Karachis E Street, one in Lahore, the studio in DHA Karachi and, most recently, a store in Houston [in the US].   And for the longest time I didnt want to delve into lawn! Farah laughs. My first-ever lawn was created in collaboration with the Lakhany Silk Mills (LSM) group and they had approached me several times and I had refused. Maliha, however, was persistent. I remember that she had just got married at the time and was leaving for a trip abroad. Once she came back, she really got to work on the lawn. It was such a challenge, Maliha says, and it continues to be that way. How do you come up with a design that appeals to someone who is 16, as well as someone who is 60? From the colour to the embroidery patterns, to the print on the dupatta to the materials used  every detail has to be looked into! And we cant even utilise our most popular colours from a year ago, because then customers will think that we have got repetitive. Farah adds, We also have to keep the prices competitive, which is increasingly difficult, because raw materials and the manufacturing process have become so expensive. Was Maliha always inspired by her mothers creative streak?  Always! says Maliha. I remember when we used to go for vacations to the US when we were young, my mother would buy dresses for me and even bedsheets and use them as samples when we got home. A lot of international brands werent available in Pakistan at the time, and so my mum would recreate the designs on her own, adding frills to the bedsheets and stitching pillows. She would also create similar clothes for me. Farah says, I have always loved Eid and I would lay out new bedsheets in all the bedrooms on Eid day. I know how to cut, stitch and embroider, and I would create festive ghararas and shalwar qameez for Maliha. Id add cancans to her frocks and really doll her up   Every mother thinks that her daughter is a doll! Maliha laughs. She even used to embroider my clothes herself. And shed also create pleated skirts with little blazers for me and inspire me by saying, You look just like Lady Diana! Nevertheless, a fashion design business can be a behemoth that is hard to rein in, with responsibilities ranging from implementing the nitty-gritties of design to deciding upon prices and production quantities. Was Maliha inspired enough to want to join her mothers atelier? Yes, she says, I dont think that I can imagine working anywhere else.   Honestly, I dont consider my work difficult, Farah observes. I really enjoy it, and my workers have been with me from the time that I first started out. Initially, I started out with a single embroiderer. Then, I got a tailor on board. Eventually, I had seven embroiderers working with me. Slowly, the team expanded as business grew. Today, they are all like family to me. Has some of the designing now been delegated to Maliha? I do head a design team but, ultimately, everything has to be approved by my mum, she says. Its like preparing for an exam. Even though she has selected the colours and patterns from before, were still very nervous about showing her the final designs. And I can really scold her if I dont like something or there is some flaw in the design, Farah laughs. Maliha herself has two young sons. Does she find it difficult balancing motherhood with the daily rigmarole at FTA?  I think I am lucky that I work with my mother. If ever I am busy, she can take over for me, says Maliha. My elder son is now five and I have pictures of him everywhere in my workplace, him lying in the workshop, playing with scraps of cloth. We have a separate area designated for children and some of the working mothers in our staff bring their children along with them. Also, I live mere minutes away from the FTA studio, and my mother-in-law and husband are very supportive. There are times when I can pick my son from school, make sure that hes had lunch and then return to work for three hours in the evening. There are other times when I am at a shoot that starts at seven in the morning and ends at seven in the evening and I cant leave at any point. It can get difficult and hectic, but I am lucky to have people who support me.  She adds: I support them too! When my husband travels, I take on more responsibilities too. What are the challenges that Maliha faces as a working mother? I think that theres a lot of mum guilt, especially because everything gets posted on social media and you worry that you may not have done enough for your child.  Its an Instagram world and you may have spent an hour decorating a basket for your childs school activity while other parents may have invested an entire day into it. And even though your child is happy, you start fretting that, perhaps, I should have made a better costume, or created a better basket. Also, people judge very quickly. You want to be there for your child but, sometimes, you cant manage a play date thats at 2pm or at 4pm. I dont remember our parents ever facing such pressures. I wonder out loud whether pressures were perhaps different back when Farah started working on her design business. Was she the odd one out at a time when not many women worked? Yes, she says, but I was lucky that my husband was very understanding. Also, I started small and only built up my business over time. Yes, a lot of my friends would constantly be meeting and I wouldnt be able to, because I was at work. I have been very lucky  I love what I do and everyone around me has been very supportive. Maliha seems to have inherited a similar love for the brand. I reminisce about how FTA initially started making waves on social media with the aid of creative campaigns, celebrity collaborations and fun behind-the-scenes (BTS) footage from shoots.  Maliha says: I love marketing, Ive studied it too. We started coming up with BTS content back when very few people were doing it, and I enjoy curating campaigns for new collections. But I do think that what I enjoy the most is the designing process. I know that its important to keep an eye on profits and set targets, but we have people who worry about all this. If I started thinking about finances all the time, I feel that my creativity would suffer. And my mums the same. Like mother, like daughter. A love for design binds Farah Talib Aziz and Maliha Aziz together as does their love for each other. Mothers are usually the number one women in their childrens lives. In the case of this particular mother-daughter power pair, we could perhaps add in number one boss and mentor.  And Maliha can be number one employee. Published in Dawn, ICON, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Mothers Day: A letter to my mum
Description :   As-salaam Alaikum, Maa, I hope this letter finds you in good spirits. Startled you with my letter, right? And you are wondering what on earth has made me write a letter when I could have simply messaged you or called you up. And I know, fumbling with anxiety, you have checked your phone by now to see if you had missed my calls or messages.  So let me assure you, everything is fine Maa, please do not fret. And keep reading this.   You know, this time I wanted to do something really special for you on Mothers Day. First, I thought of gifting you those emerald earrings you longed to have, the ones whose picture you have saved in your phones gallery for ages. Or buy you a pair of comfy shoes that will help you walk around, doing the household chores easily. But then I realised that these materialistic things will not reveal my love for you until I express it myself. Let me put it straight  for me, Mothers Day is not meant to be celebrated on only one day of the year, every day is Mothers Day.  How? Because I cannot imagine a day without your presence. The very thought of life without you makes my heart skip a beat. My day kick-starts when each morning you wake me up for the Fajr prayers and I see warmth, wisdom and love emanating from your beautiful countenance.  The reason why I exist today is because you didnt let go of believing in me. Its your resilience, courage, prayers and unconditional love that has given me the vigour to embrace the adversities of my life fearlessly. On days when the worries of tomorrow overwhelm me and make it impossible for me to climb out of bed, your counseling helps me rise and muster up the strength to combat the challenges of the world. You are not only my mother, but you are also my best friend, my North Star and my greatest motivator. When the hardships of my life seem to be unbearable, its in your arms that I find solace. When I am all lost and unable to make a decision, your words of wisdom show me the direction and help me stay focused. When situations get tough and I am on the verge of giving up, its your constant reminders to remain steadfast and have strong faith in the Almighty, that prevents me from relinquishing my objectives.  Above all, you are my greatest well-wisher. After scooping accolades, when I return home all elated and brimming with joy, you are the first one to embrace me and rejoice at my success. As I sit at my desk, penning down my sentiments, I cant help recalling the love and devotion with which you have taught me when I was little. The patience and dedication with which you have coached me have not only helped me soar in my academics, but also in all the endeavours of my life. The values and morals you have instilled in me have guided me, helped me distinguish between right and wrong, and have thus shaped my entire personality. The greatest achievement for me is when people praise me for taking after you, and I am all the more grateful to Allah for blessing me with such an amazing mother.  You have always been my true protector and guide, ever since my birth. How can I not recount the numerous sleepless nights youve spent by my bed, praying for my health whenever I have fallen ill, or the anxiousness with which you have waited for me, after school and outside the examination halls?  The most incredible part is that though this little daughter of yours is now a grown-up, your love for her has not faded away, instead it has amplified. Even today, I can see the anxiousness in your eyes when I am late from work, can feel the worry in your voice when I am unable to respond to your calls, and can discern your endearment when you cook delectable food items, especially for me. Maa, you have been a saviour throughout the ebbs and flows of my lifes struggles. The reason why I exist today is because you didnt let go of believing in me. Its your resilience, courage, prayers and unconditional love that has given me the vigour to embrace the adversities of my life fearlessly. Whether I needed a shoulder to cry on or a friend to confide in, an expert to offer me advice, or a buddy to celebrate my minuscule accomplishments, Maa, you have executed all these roles, flawlessly! I know no matter how hard I try, I can never be able to repay you for the amount of sacrifices you have made for me and for the unfaltering care, support and unconditional love you have showered on me. Nevertheless, with utmost gratitude, I pray to the Almighty Allah to bless you with abundant health and happiness, today and always. Ameen Happy Mothers Day, Maa! Love you to the moon and back!
Your ever-loving daughter.  Published in Dawn, Young World, May 11th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : No such thing as strategic state-owned enterprises, says Finance Minister Aurangzeb
Description : Finance Minister Muhammad Aurangzeb on Sunday said that there was no such thing as strategic state-owned enterprises (SOEs) as he stressed the need for privatisation. He made the remarks at a pre-budget conference in Lahore, two days after  Deputy Prime Minister Ishaq Dar said the government would limit its business only to strategic and essential SOEs under its domain but their number would be reduced from 40 after scrutiny. Chairing the Cabinet Committee on Privatisation (CCoP) meeting, which was attended by the finance minister, Dar said privatisation of loss-making SOEs would be a priority. The meeting noted that 40 SOEs were currently categorised as strategic or essential, but respective ministries would submit their details to the Cabinet Committee on State-Owned Enterprises (CCoSOE). The CCoSOE will determine the status of the SOEs to be categorised as strategic or essential entities. Speaking on Sunday, Aurangzeb said: There is no such as [a] strategic SOE. Talking about the meeting chaired by Dar on Friday, he continued, We are absolutely on the same wavelength  that there is no such thing as a strategic SOE. The finance minister said that a meeting would be held tomorrow where we will go back to various ministries and say that all this should be handed over to the private sector. There will be public-private partnership and we will accelerate the privatisation agenda, he said. Commenting on concerns regarding the privatisation of Pakistan International Airlines (PIA), Aurangzeb said the government was not just looking at foreign investors. They are local and foreign investors who are bidding [] there is no such thing that we are only looking at foreign investors, he said. Commenting on a fresh loan programme with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) programme, he said that a larger and longer programme was needed to bring permanence in macroeconomic stability and structural reforms. He also talked about energy reforms, saying that there were leakages and stressed the need for stopping theft. He said that changes were being brought to the boards of distribution companies (Discos) in order to bring in those from the private sector for better corporate governance. And then you will see how we bring those Discos towards concessions or privatisation or a combination of both, he emphasised. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : IMF mission to meet Pakistani authorities next week to discuss next phase of engagement: official
Description : An International Monetary Fund (IMF) mission will meet Pakistani authorities next week to discuss the next phase of engagement, an official from the international money lender said on Sunday. Speaking to Dawn.com, Esther Perez Ruiz, the Funds resident representative for Pakistan, said: A mission team led by Nathan Porter, IMFs mission chief to Pakistan, will meet with authorities next week to discuss the next phase of engagement. The aim is to lay the foundation for better governance and stronger, more inclusive, and resilient economic growth that will benefit all Pakistanis, she added. Pakistan last month completed a short-term $3 billion programme, which helped stave off sovereign default, but the government has stressed the need for a fresh, longer-term programme. Last week, the Fund said that a mission was expected to visit Pakistan this month to discuss the FY25 budget, policies, and reforms under a potential new programme for the welfare of all Pakistanis. Pakistan narrowly averted default last summer, and the $350bn economy has stabilised after the completion of the last IMF programme, with inflation coming down to around 17 per cent in April from a record high 38pc last May. The country is still dealing with a high fiscal shortfall and while the external account deficit has been controlled through import control mechanisms, it has come at the expense of stagnating growth, which is expected to be around 2pc this year compared to negative growth last year. Pakistan is expected to seek at least $6bn and request additional financing from the Fund under the Resilience and Sustainability Trust. On Friday, the Fund said that downside risks for the economy remain exceptionally high. Downside risks remain exceptionally high. While the new government has indicated its intention to continue the SBAs (standby arrangement) policies, political uncertainty remains significant, said the IMF in its staff report following the second and final review under the standby agreement. The Fund added that political complexities and high cost of living could weigh on policy, adding that policy slippages, together with lower external financing, could undermine the narrow path to debt sustainability and place pressure on the exchange rate. The IMF also said higher commodity prices and disruptions to shipping, or tighter global financial conditions, would also adversely affect external stability for the cash-strapped nation. The fund stressed the need for timely post-programme external financing disbursements. Additional input from Reuters Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Situation in AJK calms down after 2 days of violent clashes
Description : Following violent clashes over the last 48 hours, which left a policeman dead, the situation in Muzaffarabad seemed to have calmed down on Sunday, with a Rangers detachment that was sent to Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK) from Kohala having been withdrawn. AJK witnessed violent clashes between the police and activists of a rights movement amid a wheel-jam and shutter-down strike across the territory on Friday and Saturday, which left at least one police official dead and more than 90 others injured, officials told Dawn.com on Saturday. Mirpur Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP) Kamran Ali had said that Sub-inspector Adnan Qureshi succumbed to a gunshot wound in the chest in the town of Islamgarh, where he was deployed to stop a rally for Muzaffarabad under the banner of the Jammu Kashmir Joint Awami Action Committee (JAAC). The JAAC, which has traders at the forefront in most parts of the state, has been seeking the provision of electricity as per hydropower generation cost in AJK, subsidised wheat flour and an end to the privileges of the elite class. They called for the strike following the arrest of at least 70 of their members in raids on Thursday. Reports emerged in the wake of the protests on Sunday that three Rangers battalions had entered the territory through Kohala and were awaiting further orders. However, AJK Minister for Rural Development Faisal Mumtaz Rathore confirmed that the Rangers, due to the intervention of President Asif Zardari, were called back as soon as they entered Azad Kashmir since the situation had calmed down. Meanwhile, in Islamabad, former prime minister of AJK Sardar Abdul Qayyum Niazi slammed the deployment, calling it a drama and an attempt to score political points. First they send them, then call them back, what is this? the ex-AJK PM said. Those fighting for their rights and engaging in protest are free to do so, but they must remain peaceful, Niazi said in a press conference. He added that they (the protestors) must not give the enemy a chance to sow discord within the territory and create infighting. In a post on Facebook, Rathore acknowledged the public demands for cheap electricity, but admitted that addressing them was out of his hands. The big demand of the people, the demand for cheap electricity and the end of loadshedding, falls under the jurisdiction of the Government of Pakistan, Rathore said. Urging the public to remain peaceful, he said, In this one year [I have been in office], I have never been against the right to peaceful protest and [never] supported violence against people. In the aftermath of the protests, JAAC leader Shaukat Nawaz Mir reiterated that the committee is a peaceful organisation and willing to negotiate with the authorities to ensure the provision of cheap electricity and cheap flour. He also appreciated the withdrawal of the Rangers from the area. We have planned another shutter-down strike, he told reporters on Sunday. We have been peaceful for the last year and always will be a peaceful movement. This territory and its institutions and police are our own. Mir maintained that the JAAC is advocating for the rights of the public in AJK, but it is the bureaucrats who do not understand the publics needs that are doing the damage. The JAAC is peaceful and open to negotiations, Mir added, requesting to be notified by the authorities about decisions taken. We do not want to hurt anyone. He also slammed the federal government for not cutting down spending while at the same time claiming they have no room in the budget to subsidise electricity or flour. The government claims they cant provide cheap electricity and flour because they have no budget, but they have the money for watches and cars, Mir said, adding that the federal government and the prime minister should be ashamed. I dont want my forum to be controversial, Mir said. We are made up of respectable politicians  the local council is standing with us. The JAAC leader added that the movement was successful since members of multiple parties and councils are on our side. Our nation is conscious now. There is no politics here, we just want our rights and identity. Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif has taken notice of the situation in AJK and urged PML-N leadership and AJK prime minister Chaudhry Anwar-ul-Haq to pursue negotiations with the JAAC. Posting on X, he said, While debate, discussion and peaceful protests are the beauties of democracy, there should be absolutely no tolerance for taking the law in ones own hands and damaging government properties. He added that amidst situations of chaos and dissent, there will always be people who rush in to score political points.
The prime minister said that he was in contact with PML-N leaders and the AJK government, urging them to talk to the JAAC and resort to [a] peaceful course of action for resolution of their (JAACs) demands. Shehbaz added that despite the efforts of detractors, the issue will be resolved soon. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Fight till the last ball, PCB chief tells cricket team in Dublin
Description : Pakistan Cricket Board (PCB) Chairman Mohsin Naqvi on Sunday told the national team to fight till the last ball ahead of the second match of a three-match T20 series against Ireland. As he met players of the mens national team in the Irish capital of Dublin, the PCB quoted him as saying: Fight till the last ball; the competition should be apparent.
On Friday, Ireland recorded their maiden T20 win against Pakistan who could not defend a solid-looking 182-5 after being put in to bat first, dealing a shocking blow to the Babar Azam-led sides preparations for the World Cup, which is taking place next month in the United States. The loss to Ireland, who are in Pakistans group in the T20 World Cup, came after a series draw on home soil to a New Zealand squad missing most of their first-choice players. With Babar only recently reinstated as captain, it was another bump in the road for their tournament preparation.
Todays match will start at 7pm, with Ireland leading the series by 1-0. In a post on X, the PCB shared a video of Naqvi meeting the Green Shirts and speaking to them, adding that a detailed discussion on the action plan took place during the two-hour-long meetup. Encouraging the team, the PCB chairman urged the players to play with hard work, passion and a professional approach. He noted that T20 cricket needed a unique and aggressive approach, adding that victory was only possible if cricket was played in a modern manner. An action plan can be formulated while sitting in a room but the real test is on the ground, where the performance should be visible, the PCB quoted him as telling the team. Naqvi praised all players as undoubtedly talented, professional and the best, adding that the teams bowling attack was splendid. However, he emphasised that great attention was required when fielding so that the opponent cannot get any chance to score. The players are the hope for Pakistan and you have to meet the nations expectations. Teamwork is the fundamental thing for victory, the PCB chairman said. He noted that the public loved cricket and had expectations from the team. Naqvi said that success would come if all 11 of the players in the team performed with unity. No one is accepting the loss in the first match against Ireland. The real test after Ireland and England is the World Cup, he added. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Canada arrests fourth Indian national in killing of Sikh activist
Description : A fourth Indian national was charged by Canadian authorities on Saturday in the 2023 killing of a separatist Sikh leader in Vancouver. Amandeep Singh, 22, was already being held for unrelated gun charges before being charged with first-degree murder and conspiracy to commit murder in the slaying of Hardeep Singh Nijjar. Three other Indian nationals were arrested this month. The killing sparked a diplomatic row between Ottawa and New Delhi when Prime Minister Justin Trudeau linked Indian intelligence to the killing. Nijjar  who immigrated to Canada in 1997 and became a citizen in 2015  had advocated for a separate Sikh state, known as Khalistan, carved out of India. He had been wanted by Indian authorities for alleged terrorism and conspiracy to commit murder  allegations he denied. He was shot dead on June 18, 2023, by masked assailants in the parking lot of the Sikh temple he led in suburban Vancouver. Trudeau announced several months later that Canada had credible allegations connecting Indian intelligence to the slaying. India dismissed the allegations as absurd and responded furiously, briefly curbing visas for Canadians and forcing Ottawa to withdraw diplomats. In November, the US Justice Department charged an Indian citizen living in the Czech Republic with allegedly plotting a similar assassination attempt on American soil. Prosecutors said in unsealed court documents that an Indian government official was also involved in the planning. The shock allegations came after US President Joe Biden hosted Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi for a rare state visit, as Washington seeks closer ties with India against Chinas growing influence. US intelligence agencies have assessed that the plot on American soil was approved by Indias top spy official at the time, Samant Goel, the Washington Post reported in April. Canada is home to some 770,000 Sikhs, who make up about two per cent of the countrys population, with a vocal minority calling for an independent state of Khalistan. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Second night of auroras seen amid extreme solar storm
Description : Auroras lit up skies across swaths of the planet for the second night in a row on Saturday, after already dazzling Earthlings from the United States to Tasmania to the Bahamas the day before. A powerful solar storm  which could continue into Sunday  has triggered spectacular celestial shows usually confined to the far northern reaches of the planet, hence their nickname of the northern lights. I have the sensation of living through a historic night in France [] It was really charged, with solar particles and emotions, Eric Lagadec, an astrophysicist at the Observatoire de Cote dAzur, wrote on social media after the first night. Find good spots, away from the lights, with a clear view to the north! Late on Saturday evening, pictures again started trickling onto social media as people in the United States reported sightings, though not as strong as Friday nights. The first of several coronal mass ejections (CMEs)  expulsions of plasma and magnetic fields from the Sun   came just after 4pm GMT on Friday, according to the US-based National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)s Space Weather Prediction Center (SWPC). It was later upgraded to an extreme geomagnetic storm   the first since the Halloween Storms of October 2003 that caused blackouts in Sweden and damaged power infrastructure in South Africa. Fridays storm was listed as hitting level five geomagnetic conditions  the highest on the scale. Saturday saw G3 to G5 conditions, with G4 or higher conditions predicted Sunday and G3 conditions possible into Monday. But no major disruptions to power or communications networks appear to have been reported this time around, despite initial worries from authorities. There have only been preliminary reports of power grid irregularities, degradation to high-frequency communications, GPS and possibly satellite navigation, the SWPC said. Elon Musk, whose Starlink satellite internet operator has some 5,000 satellites in low Earth orbit, said his satellites were under a lot of pressure, but holding up so far. However Chinas National Centre for Space Weather issued a red alert on Saturday morning, warning the storm will impact communications and navigation in most areas of the country, state news agency Xinhua reported. Auroras were visible in the northern half of the country, according to media reports. Excitement over the phenomenon   and otherworldly photos of pink, green and purple night skies   popped up across the world, from Mont Saint-Michel on the French coast to Payette, Idaho  in the western United States  to Australias island state of Tasmania.
People pose for photos as a geomagnetic storm lights up the night sky above the Bonneville Salt Flats on May 10 in Wendover, Utah.  AFP
Unlike solar flares, which travel at the speed of light and reach Earth in around eight minutes, CMEs travel at a more sedate pace, with officials putting the current average at 800 kilometres per second. The CMEs emanated from a massive sunspot cluster that is 17 times wider than our planet. People with eclipse glasses can also look for the sunspot cluster during the day. The Sun is approaching the peak of an 11-year cycle that brings heightened activity. NOAAs Brent Gordon encouraged the public to try to capture the night sky with phone cameras even if they couldnt see auroras with their naked eyes. Youd be amazed at what you see in that picture versus what you see with your eyes. Fluctuating magnetic fields associated with geomagnetic storms induce currents in long wires, including power lines, which can potentially lead to blackouts. Long pipelines can also become electrified, leading to engineering problems. Spacecraft are also at risk from high doses of radiation, although the atmosphere prevents this from reaching Earth. NASA has a dedicated team looking into astronaut safety and can ask astronauts on the International Space Station to move to places within the outpost that are better shielded. Even pigeons and other species that have internal biological compasses could be affected. Pigeon handlers have noted a reduction in birds coming home during geomagnetic storms, according to NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The most powerful geomagnetic storm in recorded history, known as the Carrington Event after British astronomer Richard Carrington, occurred in September 1859. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : ADB links support with IMFs clean chit
Description :   Given my interactions with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the dialogue decisiveness of the current government, I feel very hopeful that there will be a successor programme from the Fund, said the Asian Development Banks (ADB) Country Director for Pakistan Yong Ye in an exclusive interview on the sidelines of ADBs 57th Annual Meeting in Tbilisi this week. Tacitly indicating that support from ADB would only be possible with a clean chit from the Fund, Mr Ye expressed cautious optimism for the economy. Highlighting the uncertainties from last year, Mr Ye termed the IMF agreement announced in June as a miracle. Since then, however, he said, the caretaker government did a good job stabilising the economy under the Funds Stand-By Arrangement. More importantly, he added, with the IMF agreement in place, the central banks foreign exchange reserves increased from $4.4 billion to over $9bn in the week ending on May 3. While the country may still be in the ICU, its immediate liquidity crisis has been sorted, and default has been avoided. This has given some confidence to the markets, he said. Record highs of PSX Commenting on the frequent new highs of the Pakistan Stock Exchange (PSX), Mr Ye observed that previously, when the eurobond payment was due, there had been a lot of hype in the media with speculations about whether the country would be able to repay or default. Such pieces did not induce courage and the markets started fluctuating, contributing to a fluctuating exchange rate. Banks top official says Pakistan has sorted out immediate liquidity crisis, but still in ICU This time around, in April, when the $1bn eurobond payment was due, it was paid without fanfare, indicating much better market confidence. Other positive indicators, such as a narrowing external account deficit and recovering remittances, have also improved investor confidence. However, fiscal deficit challenges remain. One major reason behind them is the high interest rate and high debt servicing burden. Act on what you know In my first meeting with Finance Minister Muhammad Aurangzeb, he showed his commitment to implementing and acting on reforms, said Mr Ye. Pakistan does not need more economic prescriptions, he said, agreeing with the finance ministers recent statements. He said the general perception is that Pakistan knows what it needs to do but never does it. Act on what you know needs to be done. He emphasised that the ADB management wants to be with the government in this difficult time. The agency understands the need to ensure that the debt is sustainable rather than an added burden that does not remove the constraints the country is facing. While the economy is recovering, there is still uncertainty moving forward. The removal of this uncertainty depends very much on the governments commitment and ability to implement economic and structural reforms. A special arrangement Mr Ye emphasised the importance of investment in reviving the economy and the role the Special Investment Facilitation Council (SIFC) could play. My understanding of SIFC is that it is a special arrangement to attract foreign direct investment from some targeted countries, he said. From the ADBs point of view, while the SIFC may be a quick short-term solution, Pakistan still needs to look for long-term systematic solutions to attract foreign direct investment. This would require an overall enabling environment with improved regulations and transparency. Given past unsuccessful incidents such as Reko Diq, SIFC, at least in the short run, can demonstrate the countrys potential and ability for investment, which can then be further broadened for other countries. An important element in attracting FDI is the ability of firms to repatriate profit out of the country. At the moment, investors may believe that while earning money in Pakistan is possible, repatriating profits is challenging. Non-productivity of real estate The country needs to increase its revenue and rationalise expenditures, Mr Ye remarked. As an example, he highlights the real estate sector where a lot of savings are invested. The real estate sector is just financial addition with no value addition. If the country invests in its natural resources instead, the country will start rolling, he said. Inflation is on a downward trend, and if this trend continues, the monetary policy rate will come down, Mr Ye opinioned, resulting in a smaller burden of debt servicing and more fiscal room. This will also unlock the investment and borrowing by the private sector, he hoped. Since there is a lot of pent-up investment demand during the period of high interest rates, Pakistan may enter into a boom cycle when the rates start coming down. But for the revival to be sustainable, it all comes back to reforms, he said.  Remaining pledges While ADB was among the institutions that pledged support after the disastrous floods of 2022, almost the entire amount has yet to be disbursed. ADB had pledged about $1.5bn, of which only $108.79 million has been released according to a media report, with a further $340.9m expected this year. In response to why there has been a delay, Mr Ye said that the amount pledged was for reconstruction and that the process cannot be rushed. The damages have to be assessed along with the ground realities, keeping in mind the new climate risk profile and the possibility that these areas may be flooded again, he said. Pointing out that water was still standing in some areas till the start of this year, Mr Ye said that the new climate risk profile needs to be assessed before the feasibility study. Some roads need to be redesigned, followed by the procurement process, contract award, and finally, disbursement. The entire process is lengthy. Mr Ye identified several critical areas for Pakistans long-term economic growth. These include controlling inflation, reducing the fiscal deficit, and diversifying the export base. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Govt hints at raising wheat purchase target
Description :  Drive to buy 400,000 tonnes of grain kicks off; farmers want wheat procured from across Punjab
 Kissan leader urges govt to ensure official rate of staple, terms proposed subsidy a pittance LAHORE: The Pakistan Agricultural Storage and Services Corporation Limited (Passco) on Saturday began its second phase of wheat procurement from Faisalabad in line with a decision of the federal government to procure 400,000 tonnes more than the original target of 1.4 million tonnes. As he kick-started the second phase, Food Minister Rana Tanveer hinted at the possibility of further increasing the target to facilitate farmers. Passco had originally aimed to purchase 1.4m tonnes, but after farmers started protesting, the pressure on the federal and provincial governments piled on and the premier decided to increase the target to 1.8m tonnes. As of now, Passco has achieved 98 per cent of the initial target and distribution of gunny bags is already underway to meet the increased target. Farmers, however, are not happy with the governments decision to procure slightly more wheat than intended. They said Passco  a federal body  operated in 13 out of 97 tehsils in Punjab and the decision to purchase additional wheat from designated areas would have a negligible impact. According to farmers, the tradeable surplus this year is expected to be about 10m tonnes and buying 400,000 tonnes would hardly make any difference. Punjab, on the other hand, is reluctant to procure wheat from growers despite province-wide agitations and the persistent stance of farmers. This has also caused a significant impact on the price of wheat, with the staple being sold at a rate much lower than the official price of Rs3,900 per 40kg. The Pakistan Kissan Ittehad claimed that farmers had lost Rs1,150 billion under the wheat head alone due to the crashing prices which reportedly dipped below Rs3,000 per 40kg. Instead of procurement, the Punjab government said it would compensate farmers with interest-free loans of Rs150bn. Kissan leader Khalid Mahmood Khokar, however, is not impressed, saying the paltry subsidy came at a cost of Rs1,150bn. Instead of this gimmickry, please ensure an officially declared price, which the provincial government had itself calculated, announced, and promised, Mr Khalid urged the Punjab government. The crisis Pakistan is going through the most difficult wheat season of its history, exacerbated by policy failure and the import of millions of tonnes of wheat shortly before the bumper harvest. The bumper crop followed a record import of 3.5m tonnes by the private sector allegedly due to the weakness of the caretaker regime.
Against the backdrop of such a huge import, hoarders also released their stock to earn profit. The releases of stock by the hoarders and the import of the commodity flooded the market and even met the entire domestic requirement, leaving Passco and the Punjab Food Department with 4m tonnes of unexhausted stock. The 3.5m tonnes imports were staggered in a way, in the name of sustained supplies, that it overlapped with domestic harvesting season and created havoc for the domestic market, explained Muhammad Ramzan, a wheat trader from Lahore. At the start of this month, the Punjab government had promised a probe into the wheat scandal against the backdrop of protests by the farmers. On Friday, the farmers resumed their protests from Multan against the provincial governments decision to not buy wheat from farmers. At the protest, PKI leader Khokhar had said the agitation would continue against the government in every district of the province till the acceptance of their demands. He had said the federal government was procuring the wheat in 16 tehsils of the province, while the Punjab government had not purchased even a single grain so far. Federal government should also buy wheat from other tehsils of the province, he had demanded. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : KP governor, CM Gandapur exchange threats in acrid spat
Description : PESHAWAR / DERA ISMAIL KHAN: The acrimony between Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Chief Minister Ali Amin Khan Gandapur and Governor Faisal Karim Kundi intensified on Saturday when the two leaders threatened each other with dire consequences. A day after the governors fiery speech, Chief Minister Gandapur warned Governor Kundi to stay within the limits of his constitutional position and avoid making olitical statements. After appearing in an anti-terrorism court in connection with the murder of former KP law minister Sardar Israrullah Khan Gandapur, the CM who belongs to the PTI said he could use his powers to banish Mr Kundi from Governor House. This Governor House is not your property. Dont force me to  turn it into a museum and open it for the public.
I will shift you to a two-room annexe, said Mr Gandapur. He went on to say that even fuel for the governors official vehicles comes from the budget of the provincial government and threatened to stop it if the governor who belongs to PPP didnt refrain from political statements, below-the-belt remarks and confrontation. Gandapur warns Kundi will be banished from official residence for indulging in politics, confrontation Youre the governor; politics is not your job, Mr Gandapur warned, calling himself the elected representative who came to power with the voters mandate. The CM added that if the governor did not pay heed to his warning, he would seek his removal. [T]he letter which notified you [as governor] will also denotify you. In a hard-hitting speech on Friday, Governor Kundi had indirectly accused the CM of being involved in the killing of former law minister Mr Israrullah and ANP leader Umar Khattab Sherani.
Mr Israrullah was killed in a suicide attack in his hometown of Kulachi near Dera Ismail Khan in October 2013. While government officials blamed the Waziristan-based Gandapur group for the bombing, a little-known shadowy group, Ansarul Mujahideen, claimed responsibility. ANPs Mr Sherani was murdered in December 2021, a day before the provinces local government elections, which he was contesting as a candidate for the post of D.I. Khan mayor. The governor said that if he relinquished his constitutional post, he would prove to be a bigger nemesis for CM Gandapur. Mr Kundi also warned that protecting the Governor House was his constitutional duty and whoever tried to occupy it would be dragged on roads. This was an apparent reply to Mr Gandapurs May 9 statement in which he warned against efforts to impose governors rule in KP and said PTI activists would occupy the Governor House. Want good ties with CM Meanwhile, in conversation with Dawn, Mr Kundi said he hoped for good relations with the chief minister, but whoever talked about occupying the Governor House will be answered befittingly. People of KP shouldnt suffer in the fight between the prime minister, governor and chief minister, he said, advising the provincial government to improve the law and order situation. He recalled the kidnapping of a sessions judge in Tank last month and claimed the chief minister paid extortion money for his release. Expected animosity The acrimonious relationship between the two leaders  both being bitter political rivals hailing from D.I.Khan  was expected since Mr Kundi was nominated for the post by his partys chairman, Bilawal Bhutto-Zardari. The CM expressed his disapproval of the appointment by not attending  Mr Kundis oath-taking ceremony last Saturday. A few days later, on May 8, the governor KP did not sign a summary moved by the provincial government to convene an assembly session, forcing the provincial government to requisition the session through the speaker to present the current fiscal budget, according to sources. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Footprints: the day the city of Karachi went berserk
Description : This article was originally published on May 12, 2017 KARACHI: Attempt after attempt fails to elicit comments from direct witnesses to the carnage that took place in Karachi on May 12 ten years ago. All these men served as judges in the countrys high courts and the apex court before they retired to re-join the legal fraternity as seasoned practitioners of the law. For each of my requests, I receive either excuse me, or sorry. Finally, one of them agrees to talk  but not openly.  Please dont mention my name, says the retired Sindh High Court judge as our conversation ends. You may write each and every word I have shared with you but not my name. I would prefer to be an anonymous source. One never knows here what can happen the next day: its better to stay away from even the memories of such controversial events. The ordeal he recalls of that bloody Saturday refreshes the grim memories of the city being under siege for nearly 24 hours, held hostage by forces in the face of whom even jurists and law-enforcers were helpless.  Two rival rallies had been planned that day  one by the legal fraternity, backed by parties then in the opposition, to welcome into the city the then deposed chief justice, Iftikhar Mohammed Chaudhry, and the other organised by the Muttahida Qaumi Movement (MQM), favoured by the then military dictator General Pervez Musharraf, in protest against the politicisation of the issue of the presidential reference against Mr Chaudhry. A certain level of fear had prevailed, but no one could have guessed the deeply disturbing events that were to follow  certainly not the then serving high court judge. I was travelling with my driver and armed guard to the Sindh High Court where the chief justice had to deliver an address when we were forced to stop near Sir Syed Girls College in Nazimabad, he says.  Armed motorcyclists surrounded his official, flag-bearing car, pulled out his driver and switched off its engine, seizing the keys. The bikers then bludgeoned the stationary car several times, so hard that its bumper fell off. In one of the busiest and most densely populated city neighbourhoods, a serving judge sat in fear.  I talked to them, he says. They were obviously aware that I was a high court judge. After debate and argument, they allowed me to leave but I reminded them that I couldnt because keys of my car had been snatched by one of them. Finally, the key was returned and the judge was allowed to leave. As he got back into his car, the men surrounding him came up with their last strike: they stripped his car of the national flag. At the nearest police station of Pak Colony, he waited for nearly two hours for police security to arrive, as promised by the Governors House after it was informed about the episode. Then came an SSP-ranking officer with his team to escort me, he says. The police left us some two kilometres from the Singh High Court building, saying that they could no longer help us. My driver parked the car at a safer place. Then, with my driver and guard, I walked to the high court to find all entrances blocked. Finally, I jumped over one of the walls to enter the building. If this was the experience of a high court judge, one can only imagine the situation for political workers. In anticipation of the two rallies, law enforcers had been put on high alert the day before. The fire brigade had been directed to remain on standby and hospitals were asked to ready themselves. But the next day, hapless citizens found that the city had been abandoned by the law-enforcement agencies, and armed youths were wandering at will. Nasir Khan, one of the Awami National Party workers, witnessed a few of them at Malir Halt. I meet Nasir almost at the same spot where he narrowly escaped death. As our rally from Quaidabad reached here [Malir Halt], it came under fire, he says. I miraculously remained unhurt but I watched two of my friends die from bullet wounds and several others fell injured. It was a terrible experience and even today I shiver while recalling that day. After 10 years, only eyewitness accounts of the May 12 events remain. Justice and any action on the part of the state are still awaited. Should we call ourselves humanity when the fallen remain un-avenged a year to a day since that fateful day in May? wrote Justice Qazi Faez Isa, a Supreme Court judge and former chief justice of the Balochistan High Court, in this paper in 2008. Years later, the question remains pertinent. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2017  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Mothers Day: Reflections of a mother
Description : This piece was originally published in Dawn, Young World on May 9, 2020. Spending sleepless nights while tending to children, feeding them, changing diapers, etc. are a part of life of every mother having infants. When the infants grow up a little, the next phase is to educate them, teach them manners and make them learn to be a part of the world out there. It is tough to do all that for me, like every other mother. After all it is not all I have to do. One has to focus on ones career and household chores at the same time, and fulfil ones duties towards other family members. Did I mention a me-time somewhere in all that I said? I guess not. There is no mentioning of it simply because there is no time left for me while doing all that I do. It is said that you learn about the true value of parents once you have children of your own. I have found this to be exactly true. The sacrifices and unconditional love it takes to be a mother has certainly made me realise the sacrifices my mother made in bringing me up. Looking back at my life, I wish I could change all those moments in my life when, as a child, I misbehaved with my mother. I also wish that I had spent more time with her and made life easier for her. As my children grow up, they seem to become less obedient and respectful. This really hurts. I see this as a general trend in all the children, nowadays. With some exceptions, the older they get, the less respect they show to their mother and elders in general. Having a mind of ones own is fine, but there cannot be any excuse for bad behaviour towards ones mother. And also just because your mother is less strict and more friendly than your father, it should not lead you to not show respect to her. Mothers like me do not want our children to be our puppets. All we ask for is recognition of our love and efforts. Expecting respectfulness is a part of that recognition. Every mother would love her child to come up to her and, as a minimum, thank her for her efforts. It would be great if the child could offer to help her in little ways. If nothing else, they should at least not leave any mess for the mother to clean up! Mothers Day is important, but it is more than just a special day. It is really a reminder that mothers deserve our respect and recognition for their love at all times. For a child to have this realisation certainly means more to mothers than having a card or flowers on Mothers Day. This is because it means that this realisation would translate into care and respect for ones mother. For my part, I have started taking care of my mother in all the ways I can. While I do not live with her, I try my best to stay in touch or visit her as much as I can. Taking care of her health and what she wants has become very important for me. It does not matter to me what others do or say about taking care of their mothers. All that matters is what my mother deserves. And that exactly is my message to you all! Do not look at what others do, think of what you can do for your mother, who deserves all the love and respect that one can. Mothers can be your friends too if you learn to share things with her. It is just a misunderstanding that they would not understand you or what you want. You can talk about anything with her: sports, cartoons, TV shows, super heroes, general knowledge, etc. You would be pleasantly surprised when you do end up confiding in her or discussing things with her. I am lucky that I get cards and flowers from my family on Mothers Day. But many things remain left to be desired on the other 364 days of the year. Still whatever my children do the rest of the year, I would never stop caring for and loving them. I guess thats what the motherhood is all about. Happy Mothers Day everyone, but make every day Mothers Day, for she never fails to make everyday special for her children. Published in Dawn, Young World, May 9th, 2020 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Indian elections
Description : THE Islamophobic rhetoric being employed by Narendra Modi for this election campaign has become shrill. Pakistan has nearly always been an electoral issue in India. However, this time, it is Indian Muslims who are bearing the brunt of the Indian prime ministers hate speech. Speaking in Rajasthan last month, he called Muslims infiltrators and said they produce too many children. In Gujarat, where, as chief minister, he had overseen the massacre of Muslims in 2002, he accused the Congress of seeking to loot Indias wealth and redistribute it among Muslims, and of organising a vote jihad against his leadership. Later, he accused the Congress and Muslims of stealing Hindu wealth and property.
Modis inflammatory rhetoric was followed by the BJPs campaign video portraying Muslims as outsiders who plundered Indias wealth. As concerns grew about communal violence, the video was removed. These allegations are a sequel to Modis public referencing of earlier conspiracy theories of love jihad (Muslims forcibly converting Hindu women and marrying them to increase the Muslim population) or land jihad (capturing land to construct religious structures and gaining control of Indias territory). Concerns that his rhetoric might incite further violence against Indian Muslims are increasing. Ordinarily, since Hindus are in a majority in India, it may be difficult to question the rationale of creating a Hindu state. However, two observations are in order. One, the expansionist designs of the cherished Hindu state seek the creation of an Akhand Bharat, a Hindu right fantasy, which would violate the territorial integrity of Nepal, Bangladesh, Pakistan, and Afghanistan, as per a map displayed in the new parliament building. This is not acceptable to the aforementioned independent states. Two, though the creation of a Hindu state should not translate into discrimination against minorities, regrettably this will be the case. The works of French political scientist Christophe Jaffrelot illustrate how Muslims, 14.5 per cent of Indias population, are grossly underrepresented in bureaucracy, the judiciary, police, and legislative organs. They are second-class citizens.
The Muslim-majority area of Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmiri is also being subjected to demographic engineering. The destruction of the centuries-old Babri Masjid by Hindu zealots in 1992 and the construction of a temple in its place has set a precedent that might be followed for other historic mosques. This contrasts sharply with the UAEs gesture of permitting a Hindu temple in Abu Dhabi. Modis anti-Muslim rhetoric is raising concerns of violence. Analysts are also pointing out the fascist tendencies of the BJP regime, a steep decline in democratic values, and a departure from the moorings of pluralism and secularism on which modern India was founded. In her book The Incarcerations, Alpa Shah contends that Modis India is using its national security apparatus to incarcerate ordinary citizens for their dissenting views. Commenting on the book, Arundhati Roy stated that this was about criminalisation and incarceration of dissent itself. Strikingly, the Modi regime has also used art and culture to project the Hindutva philosophy. Kunal Purohits book H-Pop: The Secretive World of Hindutva Pop Stars shows how Hindutva pop stars and influencers are being used to spread the message of Hindu supremacy and create acceptance of Hindutvas core beliefs. Apart from this, Modi is playing on his governments accomplishments: making India the worlds fifth largest economy; the construction of 50,000 kilometres of national highways; boosting Indias military spending; building Vikrant, Indias first domestically built aircraft carrier; and the Chandrayaan-3 moon landing. His prospects of winning a third term have been bolstered by a weak opposition. Despite the formation of the Congress-led 37-party INDIA coalition, there is no real challenge. What has bolstered his outreach is Indias enhanced global standing. In his book Why Bharat Matters, S. Jaishankar presents India as a leader of the global south and makes a case for the rejuvenation of India as a civilisational state.
There are some lessons that Pakistan could learn from Indias electoral process. One, despite the large scale of Indias elections (969 million registered voters; 1m polling stations) and the use of electronic voting machines, election results are largely accepted without much ado. Two, there is no caretaker government, as the incumbents become caretakers in a way, and refrain from announcing major policy decisions or sanctioning expenditure for development schemes. If Modi wins a third term, he is likely to maintain his pro-Hindutva, anti-Muslim, and hegemonic attitude towards regional countries, particularly Pakistan. The write is a former foreign secretary and chairman of Sanober Institute Islamabad. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Who can rock the hybrid boat?
Description : A NUMBER of developments over the past week suggest that the establishment is keen to enforce/ maintain the status quo and the only impediment in its path may be an assertive superior judiciary that has been increasingly finding its feet in recent weeks. If jailed PTI leader and former prime minister Imran Khans article in UKs conservative right-wing Telegraph newspaper blaming the military leadership directly for all his woes the week before was not hint enough of the state of play, two public statements by the latter clarified issues rather unambiguously. The first came in the DG ISPRs press briefing, which was ostensibly called to discuss Afghanistan-based terrorist groups involvement in attacks on Chinese nationals working on development projects in the country. But in response to a couple of questions about the PTI and Imran Khan related to the events of May 9 last year, the DG ISPR stated unequivocally that the only path to rehabilitation for the political party and its leaders was to seek forgiveness for attacking your own forces.
Then, perhaps, talks could happen and that too with political parties (ie, the government), as the military had nothing to do with politics. Imran Khan has been consistent in saying he wouldnt talk to the powerless political parties and that a meaningful dialogue is possible only with the military. The DG ISPR also lamented the delay in the prosecution and sentencing of all those responsible for the May mayhem  including the leaders and mastermind against whom irrefutable evidence has been gathered and submitted  and, in doing so, appeared to hint at the establishments frustrations with what it perceives as roadblocks being erected by the judiciary. The content of the live presser evoked an equally adamant response from the PTI, which went on the offensive, reiterating its stance that May 9 was a false flag operation, accusing the militarys spokesman of being economical with the truth, and saying it would be happy to live with the findings of an impartial judicial commission into the May 9 events and would even apologise if found to be at fault. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. The military spokesman had pre-empted this demand in his briefing earlier by saying if a probe were to happen, as was being demanded, it ought to start with 2014, and not nine years later. The 2014 PTI sit-in in the federal capital was said to have been instigated and backed by the then ISI chief. This was the first indication that the military was prepared to hold its own accountable for past follies, if it paved the way for the trials and sentencing of PTI leaders it says were responsible for the attacks on defence installations in a number of cities in Punjab and KP. While the spokesman left nothing to the imagination, on the first anniversary of May 9, the army chief added his voice to his chief spokesmans in terms of stressing the need for punishing the perpetrators of the violence a year earlier, also lashing out against what he called digital terrorism.
This indicates that harsher curbs on social media are planned. So far, the PTI has had overwhelming social media dominance and had been able to keep a step ahead of its adversaries, but we will find out soon whether it has what it takes to bypass software the Chinese have developed over the years (and Pakistan has reportedly acquired) and successfully used to block dissident content. With this ever-widening gulf between the establishment and the party it once saw as a panacea for all that ails Pakistan, the one thing that many felt could force a rethink in the establishment would have been a public manifestation of the immense support enjoyed by the PTI, as evidenced in last Februarys elections. Many Pakistan watchers keenly waited all day for multitudes of PTI supporters to spill out onto the roads and streets of major urban conurbations on the party leaders call to break the shackles and protest on May 9. But the brutal crackdown of the past one year seems to have knocked the wind out of the partys sails and worn down the workers will. People may turn out to vote for it in droves, but did not appear prepared to risk life, limb and liberty in coming out for mass protests. Some small localised protests did happen, but had zero impact in the sense of influencing decision-making in the corridors of power. Going forward, a couple of factors will play a role in steering developments. The first and foremost will be the confidence the army chief has in his control over his institution. His predecessor appointed a dozen major generals to three stars in his final six weeks in office and left the incumbent little room in terms of forming his own team. Natural attrition and the more dramatic exit of a couple of three stars on disciplinary grounds recently has, 18 months down the line, given the chief an opportunity to place senior officers of his own choosing in key roles which will give him greater freedom of action both inside and outside the institution. The promotion of three officers this week, including the DG ISPR, to three stars was another step in that direction. The military saw May 9 as a coup against the chief, a failed attempt to dislodge him from office. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. With the PTI protests failing to gather momentum, the only impediment in his path seems to be an increasingly assertive superior judiciary. It can and will, in all likelihood, challenge the establishments pre-eminence in decision-making. It isnt clear how the latter plans to deal with that, especially because it believes that a direly needed economic revival is only possible under the umbrella of a hybrid set-up and in a relatively calm political environment. Only the judiciary can rock its boat now. The writer is a former editor of Dawn. abbas.nasir@hotmail.com Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Looming pension crisis cries out for corrective measures
Description : Pension reform is again a hot topic, but this time, bureaucrats will make it appear as if it is intended to benefit top officials. The reforms go beyond just raising the retirement age or taxing pensions. Instead, a series of actions, similar to those that were done in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP), should be seriously considered to reduce the cost of pensions to the government exchequer. The national pension cost will reach nearly Rs2 trillion in FY24, and it is predicted to rise to Rs10tr in the next decade if no reforms are implemented. In 2002-03, the pension cost stood at Rs25 billion, but in a span of just 20 years, it skyrocketed to over Rs1.5tr. Pension reforms have previously been tested in KP and generated the expected cost-saving results. It is high time to rationalise the existing pension programme and transition to more modern schemes available in developing and developed countries. Last week, Finance Minister Muhammad Aurangzeb proposed to raise the retirement age from 60 to 65 years. It has sparked controversy over whether the government intends to benefit only a select few individuals. This decision has both advantages and disadvantages. In KP, the age restriction was raised to 63 years in 2019 with a projected annual savings of Rs20bn. However, the decision was reversed due to strong protest from bureaucrats, and the court also overturned the decision. However, KPs other pension reforms remained in effect. KP Advisor on Finance Muzzammil Aslam has a different take on raising the age restriction than his predecessor, who implemented a series of reforms. Mr Aslam believes that the lump sum payment of pension payments will be delayed for the next five years, providing some breathing room for the time being. This will allow the government to show a lower budget deficit. The net impact will increase when the five-year allowances are added to the basic salary, which will be used to pay the pension. The age extension will postpone payments, but total payouts to employees will climb over the following five years. While these efforts provide some relief in the short term, crucial steps must be implemented to address the increasing pension liabilities. The governments liabilities have jumped from Rs25bn in FY03 to Rs2tr in FY24 There is another idea to tax pensions. It may also face political challenges. However, the KP government has imposed a 5pc pension tax on grades 17 and above on their executive allowance. It is estimated that this measure alone will generate Rs150bn in contributions to a pay-as-you-go pension system. This was not an easy decision, but it was made in KP to obtain some contribution from existing employees. The federal government can look into this step in response to opposition to taxing pensions. KP reforms In 2004, based on recommendations from a World Bank project, the India implemented a national pension scheme wherein employee contributions are matched by the government. Pakistan did not choose to adopt it since it was not anticipated that the cost would rise so dramatically over the next 20 years. Taimur Khan Jhagra, former finance minister of KP, took the lead in implementing a series of pension reforms, including the introduction of a contributory pension scheme for new employees beginning July 1, 2022. Few substantial changes were made to the existing pension programme. A well-known 13-tier pension system was in place, covering the pensioners widow, children, parents, siblings, sisters, and grandchildren. KP confined it to direct dependents. The federal government did the same last year, but other provinces have not followed suit. The previous PTI government raised KP and Punjabs minimum retirement age to 55 from 45, reducing KPs pension bill by Rs20bn alone. KP consolidated various pensions into a single one. Previously, individuals could receive two pensions simultaneously, with an active employee receiving both a salary and a pension. The major reform is the implementation of a contributing pension scheme for new employees. Under this programme, the KP government contributes 12pc and employees contribute 10pc. So far, 40,000 staff have been hired under this system starting July 1, 2022. There are additional critical reforms that the KP and federal governments should implement, such as revisiting the single Universal Pay Scale between Grades 1 and 22. Pay in provinces is decoupled from the Centre and between departments, allowing each department to develop a pay scale appropriate for their budget and the market value of their professions. Pension reforms are greatly needed. The question is whether the state will be able to sustain pension payments for the next 10 to 15 years. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : SMOKERS CORNER: KHAN AND THE GENERALS
Description : In May 2023, a recorded phone call  allegedly between the mother-in-law of the former Chief Justice of Pakistan (CJP) Umar Atta Bandial, and the wife of a lawyer-member of Imran Khans populist Pakistan Tehreek-i-Insaf (PTI)  was leaked on social media. In the call, the two ladies can be heard criticising the coalition government made up of the parties that had ousted Khans regime in April 2022 through an act of parliament. At one point in the leaked conversation, the mother-in-law laments, Yeh kambakht martial law bhi tau nahin lagaatay! [These cursed people dont even impose martial law!] Bykambakht,she meant the military establishment (ME). The conversation was surreal on many levels. Khan had been the blue-eyed boy of the ME, until he had a falling out with his makers. From 2011 till he was elected as prime minister in 2018, the ME had successfully shaped Khans political rise in a highly coordinated manner. His popularity was first established within the rank and file of the military. Then, some TV journalists were brought on board, followed by the induction of some vital members of the judiciary.
This troika  the ME, the electronic media and the judiciary  was complimented by the trained social media wing of Khans PTI to proliferate narratives pitched against the two older mainstream parties, the Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) and the Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP). The two were deeply demonised as being corrupt. After his ouster, Imran Khan was convinced that the establishment had betrayed him, and the May 9-10 protests last year were an attempt to rally support amongst pro-Khan factions in the military. However, any military intervention was drastically overestimated by his supporters A constituency that had initially been built by the former military dictator Gen Pervez Musharraf, and which mostly consisted of middle-class and upper-middle-class Pakistanis, was navigated by the ME and the media in such a manner that it eventually fell in Khans lap. This became a quadrilateral elite, comprising the ME, the media, the judiciary and the middle classes. After Khans ouster in April 2022, he began to publicly lambast the ME, accusing it of betraying him. But the truth is, due to the many abject failures of Khans government, the ME had begun to gradually distance itself from him months before he was ousted. In February 2022, Bandial became the CJP. He was cut from the same cloth that at least four of his predecessors were. These included Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry and, even more so, Justice Saqib Nasir, Justice Asif Khosa and Justice Gulzar Ahmad. Anti-PTI parties often accused them of being overtly pro-Khan. Justice Bandial was accused of having a soft corner for Khan. Truth is, Bandial wasnt very good at hiding this soft corner. Now the question is, during the time of the aforementioned phone call leak, when Khan was holding angry rallies and condemning the ME, why was Bandials mother-in-law yearning for a military takeover? Equally surreal was the presence of banners in some pro-Khan rallies with We Want Martial Law written on them. Also, why did the PTI  by planning last years violent riots on May 9 and 10, in which PTI supporters and members attacked military property  believe that this would cause a split in the armed forces and bring pro-Khan generals to power? Many academics who study coups are of the view that, if the conditions allow, street protests can be followed by a coup detat. According to the political scientist Scott A Tyson, protests are often a signal to the elites to intervene.
The elites in this context are the military and political elites. These may also include the higher judiciary and business elites. A regime facing the protests, too, is made up of political elites. Once the anti-regime elites decide that the protests are clearly signalling for an intervention, this is then communicated to the state elites. The media too plays a role in this. Its reporting of the protests may strengthen the signal and galvanise the military to intervene. The mother-in-laws kambakht lament was expressing a desperate yearning within sections of economic elites for military intervention. This nature of signalling was loud and clear on numerous WhatsApp groups when Khan was holding rallies against his ouster. The signal became even more obvious when the We Want Martial Law banners began to appear at the rallies. Some media personnel also started enhancing the signal to the ME. But by late 2022, the MEs top leadership had changed. A general who had earlier exited the project that was set up to facilitate Khans rise became the new army chief. Yet, PTI believed that many remnants of the project were still active within the military. I believe that with the judiciary still in facilitation mode, the notion of causing a split within the military to replace the new military chief with pro-Khan generals was the brainwave of some retired military men who were well-versed in the theories of post-protest coups. Once the signal to intervene in Khans post-ouster rallies was ignored by the new ME, a violent uprising was conceived that was to target the new ME. The uprising was enacted to evoke the concerns of the supposed pro-Khan generals. The signal now was: eject the new army chief and intervene (on the side of Khan) to avoid an all-out civil war. This plan could not have been formulated without the input of some retired officers. Many of them had been quite vocal in their support for Khan.
The violent May 9 and 10 protests were orchestrated by a political elite (PTI) against another set of elites (the coalition government) to signal the need for an intervention to judicial and military elites. But, according to Tyson, whether or not a coup will succeed is generally not certain to elites. This uncertainty is caused by the uncertainty regarding the actions of other elites. The other elite, in the context of the May 9 and 10 riots, was the military. An intervention by pro-Khan officers was drastically overestimated by the planners and the plan collapsed. The coalition government was able to withstand the assault. The new military chief began to swiftly oust the remaining pro-Khan elements from the military  even though those remaining in the judiciary are now trying to avoid suffering a similar fate through a pushback in the name of the independence of the judiciary.This, too, is quite surreal. Published in Dawn, EOS, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : A turbulent 2023
Description : PAKISTAN faced a tumultuous year in 2023 marked by severe economic distress and a sharp erosion of civil liberties. As documented in the HRCPs annual report, the year was nothing short of a human rights crisis on multiple fronts. Economic hardship was pervasive, with back-breaking inflation  nearly 40pc  and low growth hitting the common citizen the hardest. Protests were widespread, ranging from government employees striking against delayed salaries and pension issues to political demonstrations demanding timely elections. The state responded with indifference and sometimes outright violence, underlining its disregard for the peoples constitutional rights. The political arena was no less strained: the year saw unprecedented violence following the arrest of former prime minister Imran Khan; subsequent PTI-led riots were met with harsh government crackdowns. This included mass arrests and the controversial use of military courts for civilian trials. Political dissent was stifled and freedom of speech curtailed with internet shutdowns and media gags on reporting of certain political leaders. Sadly, the governments management of the turmoil involved significant overreach, impacting judicial independence and skewing the electoral landscape. The swift passage of laws granting sweeping powers to intelligence agencies and restricting media freedoms points to the governments alarming propensity to consolidate power at the cost of transparency and accountability.
Human rights violations were not limited to political suppression. The report highlights severe abuses such as enforced disappearances, alleged extrajudicial killings and custodial torture by state agencies. The societal impact of these policies and actions has been devastating. Moreover, marginalised communities, including women, children, religious minorities, and transgender persons, faced increased violence and discrimination. Notable too was the harsh crackdown on peaceful assemblies like the Baloch Yakjehti Councils protests. On the international front, despite engaging with global human rights mechanisms, Pakistans selective adherence to recommendations concerning enforced disappearances and the use of the death penalty reflected a reluctance to fully align with international human rights standards. Rulers would do well to remember that adhering to those standards will help maintain Pakistans desperately needed GSP-Plus status and be a more inviting place for foreign investment.
As the year proceeds, it is imperative for the state to reconsider its approach to human rights. The government must ensure the independence of the judiciary, respect for democratic processes, and protection for all citizens against the abuse of power. Laws that infringe on freedom of expression and assembly should be reviewed and reformed. Additionally, there should be a concerted effort to address the economic inequalities that underpin much of the social unrest. For a stable and prosperous Pakistan, human rights must be more than an ideal; they must be an integral part of governance and everyday life. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Love knows no boundaries at Karachis Edhi Home nursery for special children
Description : KARACHI: Its one day to Mothers Day and the childrens nursery at the Edhi Home in Mithadar is decorated with balloons and posters along with framed photographs of the late couple Abdul Sattar Edhi and Bilquis Edhi. Children in the classrooms are busy making greeting cards, drawing pictures of themselves and the only woman whom they have come to know as their mother, their Chhoti (younger) Mummy Sabah Faisal Edhi. The duties of the busy mother of so many children, including four of her own, starts from early morning. After tending to her own household duties and sending off her youngest, Moosa Edhi, to school, she is in the nursery at 8am sharp, inquiring from the staff there if everyone had a good sleep, if anyone had any issues during the night. It has become a habit with her to visit the nursery first to inquire about her babies before getting to her other work of calling up the other Edhi Homes and Centres, asking about the other children, their health and school progress, asking about the women in their Homes, tending to the marriage proposals, and adoption procedures and planning outings and picnics for the children. When parents discover their babies are not well, they quietly leave them in our cot, says Sabah Edhi as country celebrates Mothers Day today But today, before she can go inside the nursery, she stops in the playroom to admire three-year-old Fatimas greeting her with a broad smile and a happy dance. Chhoti Mummy hugs the child and gestures to know if she has eaten breakfast. Fatima is deaf and mute. She has only recently been fitted with a cochlear implant, which has enabled her to hear and appreciate music to which she loves to dance. It is quite obvious that Sabahs favourite in the nursery is five-year-old Moosa, named by Mummy, Bilquis Edhi, herself, after her own youngest grandson, Sabah and Faisals youngest son Moosa. But this Moosa, even though he is five, doesnt look more than a year old. His growth is stunted. Sabah lifts him out of his cot and cuddles him lovingly. The nursery only has special children or children with learning disabilities. Moosa was the last child here named by Bilquis Edhi. The rest have been given names by their Chhoti Mummy. There are two newborn baby girls, Aimen and Noor Fatima, peacefully sleeping in their cradles in the cheerful blue nursery. Both the babies are blind. The moment some parents discover that all is not well with their babies they quietly leave them in our cot, says Sabah. They never return for them, she sighs. Parents of very sick children, too, disown them even when they know that their child doesnt have much time to live. We take them in, find them the best of medical care till the last of their breath, she adds. On discovering a child in the cot, we first try to get information about who left him or her there followed by a thorough medical check-up. If they are in need of medical care, we make sure that they receive the best that there is. Just the other day, someone left a little girl suffering from diarrhoea. She had to be hospitalised, she informs. Just then one little girl, of about four years of age, who also looks like she is considerably attached to her Chhoti Mummy walks in and runs up to her. She is normal. There is nothing wrong with this one, Sabah says. She says her name is Manahil. We found her near Sohrab Goth. Most of the children in our Sohrab Goth Centre are much older so I brought her here with me until we can find her parents, she informs. By the grace of God, there is no shortage of space, love and care in this Home built for these children by Edhi Sahab and Mummy, she says, kissing the childs head. All children are a blessing, a priceless gift from God. I wish the parents who discard their children like or neglect them would realise this. I wish such parents could love their special, disabled or sick children like they love their normal children, she says. Sometimes, these very children who they love so much because they are normal and healthy grow up to discard their parents when they are old and weak. Thats the story of so many old people in our homes, she concludes. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Documentary on Dr Aafia Siddiqui launched in Karachi
Description : KARACHI: Aafia Siddiqui  The True Story, a documentary by Friends of Aafia, was launched here at the Karachi Press Club (KPC) on Saturday. The documentary shed light on various aspects of the life of Dr Aafia from her birth, education, marriage and to her kidnapping in Karachi and confinement in a notorious US prison.
View this post on Instagram
Aafias sister Dr Fowzia Siddiqui and Muslim Matters Editor-in-chief Hena Zuberi and others spoke at the event. Dr Fowzia said that her sister Dr Aafia was a gifted child, a bright scholar and a loving and caring person. She got a PhD degree in neurosciences from Brandies University of the US and it was her dream to revolutionise education system in Pakistan. In the documentary, human rights lawyer Clive Stafford Smith, who currently represents Dr Aafia, said a vast majority of the American people had no idea who Dr Aafia was and they also did not care.
He said that she has suffered a lot in the US prison and braved all sorts of torture. El-Hajj Mauri Saalakhan, the founding president and director of operations at The Aafia Foundation, told the documentary makers that after 9/11, the US targeted the human rights and liberties of people, especially Muslims. He said Dr Aafia also fell prey to this victimisation and in 2003 she was kidnapped, along with her children, in Karachi and got disappeared on mere suspicion that her husband had bought online night vision goggles. Umme Muhammad, the president of the Musawemem Campaign, said for the last 15 years she had been linked to the case of Dr Aafia but disappointingly nothing more could be achieved.
She said Dr Aafia was targeted only because she was Muslim. Yvonne Ridley was amongst the first investigative journalists who told the world that Dr Aafia was jailed in Afghanistan. Talking about the grey lady prisoner of Bigram jail, she said in those times the US administration would dehumanise the prisoners and the same was done to Dr Aafia. She was wounded by the US soldiers and in injured condition she was brought to the US and tried by a court in a highly biased manner and jailed for long 86 years, which means the rest of her life. Zeina El-Debis, leader of the Friends of Aafia and founder of the Shade of Mercy Foundation, talked about their efforts to get Dr Aafia repatriated on humanitarian grounds. She said the documentary was also a part of such efforts. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Situationer: Riverine region in the crosshairs of militia violence
Description : DESPITE a year-long anti-dacoit operation in upper Sindhs riverine area, the dacoit factor remains an enigma for the provincial police. The situation took a new turn on May 5 when the Bugtis, allegedly backed by the Punjab police and equipped with military-grade weapons, infiltrated the riverine area of Rwanti in Ghotki, which lies on the Sindh-Punjab border, adding a new layer of complexity to the ongoing operation. The recent incident has once again laid bare the seeming helplessness of the Sindh police, sparking outrage among the provinces intelligentsia. The scourge of dacoits has long plagued parts of northern Sindh, with the governments efforts to eradicate them yielding little success. Despite continued endeavours to tackle the issue, the desired results remain elusive. The Kalpar Bugtis, led by their chief Jalal Kalpar Bugti, claimed to have exacted revenge for the murder of his 30-year-old son, Abdul Rehman Kalpar, by killing two prominent dacoits from the Shar community and injuring half a dozen others. The incident occurred in the Machhko police station area, which falls under the jurisdiction of the Punjab police. The dacoits killed were identified as Alim alias Almo Shar, brother of Sanu Shar, and Hakim alias Haku Shar. Rehman Kalpar was ambushed and killed by dacoits on Feb 13 while he was travelling on the CPEC road in Ghotki district. Jalal Kalpar reached out to the Sindh police, seeking their assistance in avenging his sons murder, according to a senior police officer familiar with the situation. Dacoit issue remains an enigma for Sindh police Jalal Kalpar is unapologetic and straightforward in justifying his actions. I repeatedly reached out to the Ghotki police, but they ignored me. I went to perform Umrah, and upon my return, I was approached by the Punjab police to liaise with them and see how things work, he told Dawn over phone from Sui in Balochistan.
Jalal alleged that Ghotki police SSP Anwar Khetran made excuses, claiming that his force was outgunned by the dacoits, as they only had G-3 and Kalashnikov rifles. However, he added, Mr Khetran did acknowledge that geo-fencing evidence had confirmed the involvement of the Shar community in his sons murder. Punjab police sought help from me in terms of human resource and police would lead the offensive. My men were there as a cover. Finally, Shars were killed in Machko police limits of Punjab. Sindh police didnt do anything in this offence, Jalal alleged. Jalal Kalpar hails from those Bugti families who defied the late Nawab Akbar Bugti and were subsequently displaced from Dera Bugti, settling in Sindh. Following Rehmans killing, Jalal declared at a jirga in Sui that he would hold accountable those responsible, specifically targeting Shaharyar Shar, the chieftain of the Shar clan and a former PTI leader who later joined PPP. In an attempt to defuse the situation, Shar reached out to Jalal to clarify his position and maintain neutrality. Jalal conveyed message to Shaharyar that if Abid Hussain Jatoi, Abid Sundrani, or Gul Mohammad Jakhrani stand surety for him, only then will he talk to him. Only Gul Mohammad agreed, and he, along with Shaharyar, met Kalpar at his Sukkur residence, but names of Rahib Khan Shar and Sana Shar emerged as those responsible for Rehmans murder, a police officer said. Police post as Bugtis base A former SSP of Ghotki said that before the May 5 incident, Bugtis had started arriving in areas along the Sindh-Punjab border. They [Bugtis] wanted Bhaya-4 police post vacated by Sindh police. This post is manned by Ghotki police, but the area falls in Punjabs territorial limits. As they wanted to use this post as their operational base, but didnt find Ghotki police forthcoming in their response, so they turned to Punjab police eventually, said the officer. According to him, the Punjab police permitted the Bugtis to utilise the Camp-2 location, which was situated approximately 800 metres from Sanu Shars hideout. Its an ideal location from which they can confront the Shars comfortably, the officer added. Viral video images revealed that the Bugtis, armed with prohibited and military-grade weapons, disembarked from APCs in the katcha area. The ensuing gun battle, which lasted a couple of days, resulted in the deaths of two Shars and injuries to several others. The Bugtis then departed. According to a former SSP of Shikarpur, the military-grade weapons used were of 82mm dimension, a type commonly seen in Afghanistan. Dangerous precedent Professor Inam Shaikh, an analyst, says, The incident has set a dangerous precedent. He urges the Supreme Court to take suo motu notice. How can state collaborate with private persons? It amounts to creating private militia which otherwise means civil war. Supreme Court must step in to take action against police authorities and criminals for this illegal act, he insists. Naseer Memon, a writer, has analysed the situation from the perspective of good dacoits, bad dacoits and the economy of the katcha area. The recent episode of allowing one tribe to attack another in the katcha area can snowball this crime into a tribal warfare. This can flare up a bloodbath, he says. He believes that a multi-stakeholder economy, operating behind the scenes, drives the dacoits, kidnapping, and ransom industry in upper Sindh. A police official reveals that Rahib Shar has been primarily responsible for the kidnapping of people on the CPEC road and other areas. Meanwhile, Sanu Shar has been running a honey trap industry in the riverine area. According to another police officer, Rahib Shar is residing in Sindhs riverine area, while Sanu Shar is based in Punjabs limits. Actually, there is a strip of riverine land stretching over around 3-4km that falls in Sindh but administratively looked after by Rahim Yar Khan administration. Since Punjab police dont pay heed to this area much and Sindh police also remain inactive, it has become a sort of no mans land and a safe haven for outlaws, claims an SSP from lower Sindh. Bugtis aim to target Shars as a community, while the actual culprits, Rahib Shar and Sanu Shar, remain out of their reach. After the July 28, 2023, killing of notorious dacoits Janu Indher, Soomar Shar, Shahzado Dashti, Nazar Mohammad alias Nazroo alias Kato Shar, and Mubashir alias Mushir Indhar, the Sindh police chief was initially reluctant to take a position. However, the Sindh police later claimed credit for the operation. Meanwhile, the Punjab police also staked their claim. Nevertheless, the Sindh police asserted their right to the head money of Rs8.5 million fixed by the government against Janu, Soomar, and Shahzado. After the Bugtis onslaught on the Shars, Sanu Shar uploaded a video clarifying that he was not involved in Rehmans murder. However, this failed to appease Jalal Kalpar, who has temporarily withdrawn from the area but remains resolute in his vow to take on the Shars until Rehmans murderers are killed. I have no issues with Sindh or the Sindhi people, nor did I have any enmity with the Shars as a community. It is the Ganderi Shars, specifically Sannu, Moriyo, Jamal, and Rahib, who are responsible for my sons murder. So, my quest for vengeance is far from over, he declared. Despite repeated messages and calls, Ghotki SSP Sumair Noor Channa remained unavailable to explain whether criminal cases have been lodged in this regard. Similarly, Rahim Yar Khan SSP Rizwan Gondal did not reply to questions about how Punjab police are backing private militias to take on outlaws. A message was also sent to Sindh IG Ghulam Nabi Memon to get his side of the story, but no contact could be established with him. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Ruling coalition loses 27 reserved seats in Punjab
Description :  Speaker suspends PML-Ns 23, PPPs two, and one member each of PML-Q, IPP
 Decision announced on point of order raised by PTI-backed SIC leader
 In National Assembly, ruling coalition also likely to lose 23 seats ahead of budget session LAHORE / ISLAMABAD: The ruling coalition in Punjab led by PML-N on Friday lost dozens of reserved seats in the provincial assembly when the speaker suspended 24 women and three minority MPAs elected on reserved seats and barred them from joining the house proceedings. Twenty-three of the suspended MPAs belonged to PML-N, two to PPP and one each to PML-Q and IPP. Speaker Malik Mohammad Ahmed Khan took the decision on a point of order raised a day ago by opposition lawmaker Rana Aftab of PTI-backed Sunni Ittehad Council (SIC) during the house proceedings. The opposition member had argued that the Supreme Court had suspended the decision of the Election Commission of Pakistan (ECP) of allocating the reserved seats of SIC to other parties on the plea that the SIC had neither contested elections nor had submitted a list of nominees for the seats reserved for women and minorities. But Speaker Khan ruled that he had sought opinions of the advocate general as well as the provincial law department and would take a decision only on receiving their reports. Soon after the beginning of house proceedings on Friday, the speaker read out the Supreme Court order and gave the ruling that Rana Aftabs point of order was lawful and suspended the 27 members immediately. When Mr Aftab pointed out that the suspended MPAs had unlawfully voted for the resolution condemning May 9 violence, the chair said he should have raised the issue when the resolution had been put to vote a day ago. The women MPAs suspended were Maqsoodan Bibi, Rubina Nazir, Salma Zahid, Kanwal Nauman, Zeba Ghafoor, Saeeda Samreen Taj, Sheharbano, Amna Parveen, Syed Sumera Ahmed, Uzma Butt, Afshan Hussain, Shagufta Faisal, Nasreen Riaz, Sajida Naveed, Farzana Abbas, Mariya Talal, Tasheen Fawad, Abida Bashir, Saeeda Muzaffar, Faiza Monima, Amera Khan, Samiya Ata, Rahat Afza and Rukhsana Shafiq. The minority MPAs were Tariq Masih Gill, Waseem Anjum, and Basroji. National Assembly After the Supreme Courts decision and the Punjab Assembly speakers action, the ruling coalition in the National Assembly is also set to lose nearly two dozen members ahead of the crucial budget session. President Asif Ali Zardari on Friday summoned the National Assembly session on Monday (May 13) and the SIC members are expected to seek a similar ruling from Speaker Ayaz Sadiq. After allocating reserved seats to the parties in the NA in proportion to the general seats won by them in the Feb 8 elections, the Election Commission of Pakistan (ECP) had withheld the notifications on 23 reserved seats  20 for women and three for minorities  due to the dispute on the allocation of the seats after the decision of the PTI-backed independents to join the SIC. Later, the ECP refused to allocate these seats to the SIC and issued notifications distributing these seats to the parties in the ruling coalition headed by the PML-N. The ECP allocated 15 seats reserved for women to the PML-N, four to PPP and one to the JUI-F. It allocated one seat each reserved for the minorities to the PML-N, the PPP and the MQM-P. As a result, PML-N became the largest party in the NA with 123 seats whereas the tallies of PPP and the JUI-F rose to 73 and 11, respectively. The ECP had also issued notifications on the reserved seats for women and minorities in Punjab and the KP assemblies the same day. The PML-N had initially won a total of 75 general seats and was joined by nine independents. With the allocation of 19 reserved seats for women and four reserved seats for minorities, the number reached 107. However, after the March 5 notifications, the PML-N had been allocated 15 out of the remaining 20 reserved seats for women and one out of the three remaining seats reserved for minorities, taking the partys tally to 123 seats. Likewise, PPP had won 54 general seats and was allocated 12 seats reserved for women and two for minorities. After the allocation of four more seats reserved for women and one for minorities on March 5, the number of the PPP lawmakers is now 73, still fewer than the PTI-backed independents who had joined the SIC hoping to get reserved seats. The MQM-Pakistan has 22 members in the National Assembly, while the number of JUI-F lawmakers had gone up to 11 from seven. The SC decision is expected to have no effect in the composition of the Balochistan Assembly as PTI had not won any seat in the province in the Feb 8 polls. However, in the provincial assembly of Sindh, the two reserved seats for women were given to PPP from the share of the PTI-SIC, which had nine members. KP Assembly The most interesting distribution of reserved seats had been observed in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Assembly, where the PTI-backed independents had won 91 seats compared to just 19 seats secured by all other political parties combined. However, the JUI-F, which could get only seven general seats to stay on top among these political parties, was allocated 10 reserved seats for women. Likewise, the PML-N, which won six general seats, was given eight reserved seats. The PPP, which bagged four general seats, was allocated six reserved seats. The ANP and the PTI-P, which clinched one general seat each, also remained lucky to have their numbers double in the provincial assembly. However, these MPAs in KP Assembly have not yet taken oath as the speaker has refused to call the session. Gwadar killings Meanwhile, the Punjab Assembly during its Fridays sitting adopted a resolution condemning the recent killing of 11 workers belonging to Punjab in Gwadar. The resolution presented by treasury members Amjad Ali Javed demanded the federal government arrest the culprits. It also demanded that the centre announce a compensation package for the heirs of the deceased. South Punjab On a point of order raised by opposition MPA Nadeem Qureshi, Punjab Finance Minister Mujtaba Shuja told the house that the south Punjab secretariat was not being wrapped up; rather the officers who had been promoted were being replaced by new appointments. The minister also rejected the stance that the PML-N was against the development of south Punjab and said that the region had been developed the most when incumbent Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif was the chief minister of Punjab. Published in Dawn, May 11th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : PIA staff forgets to put boys body on plane
Description :
SKARDU: Officials of PIA, the Civil Aviation Authority and police try to placate the protesting father of the deceased.Photo by the writer
GILGIT: In a heart-wrenching incident, a PIA flight from Islamabad to Skardu left behind the body of a six-year-old boy at the capitals airport on Friday, while his parents continued their journey, unaware of the shocking mistake. The parents of the deceased boy were shocked and fainted at Skardu airport when they came to know that their sons body had been left behind in Islamabad. Mujtaba, a resident of Katshi village of Kharmang district, was diagnosed with a tumour at a hospital in Skardu and doctors referred him to Rawalpindi for treatment a month ago. His father Muhammad Askari and mother took him to Rawalpindi and he had been under treatment at Benazir Bhutto Hospital for weeks. Mujtaba lost his life in the hospital on Thursday. The parents decided to transport the body of their child to their native village of Katshi for burial, through a PIA flight on Friday, as a 24-hour-long journey from Islamabad to Skardu by road with the body was not possible due to hot weather. Shocked parents, relatives protest against airline managements negligence at Skardu airport The deceased boys parents and another relative confirmed their tickets at flight PK-451 from Islamabad to Skardu on Friday morning. They brought the body to Islamabad airport at 6am and completed cargo procedure for the body after fulfilling SOPs and airlines rules and made the payment. Ibrahim Asadi, a relative of the deceased boy, told Dawn that the body was scheduled to be transported with the parents to Skardu from Islamabad at 9am. He said the flight was delayed for four hours and left Islamabad at 1pm. Upon arrival at Skardu airport at 2pm, the parents were informed that mistakenly the body was not loaded on the plane and left behind at Islamabad airport. The news sparked grief and outrage as parents were shocked and started crying while the boys mother and father fainted at the airport. The relatives of the boy waiting to receive the body also gathered at the airports lounge and started protest against the PIA managements negligence. It continued for three hours. Officials of PIA, Civil Aviation Authority and other departments, who were on duty at Skardu airport, tried to calm down the boys parents and relatives and admitted their mistake. They assured the parents of bringing back the body on Saturday (today). The PIA officials said the company, which handles cargos at the airport, is responsible for not loading the body and assured the parents that action would be taken against it for negligence. The boys parents and relatives chanted slogans against the PIA administration. They said the poor family had paid higher price to transport the body through the PIA flight, but the airline committed a serious negligence. They appealed to the government to take action against those responsible for the negligence. Yousaf Kamal, another relative of the deceased boy, said the body had deliberately not been loaded on the plane. He said Minister for Kashmir Affairs and Gilgit-Baltistan Engr Amir Muqam was scheduled to fly to Gilgit from Islamabad on Friday, adding that the PIA flight from Islamabad to Gilgit couldnt operate due to the bad weather condition. He said the federal minister had changed his plan and decided to go to Skardu and kept the passengers waiting. He said the flight was scheduled to depart from Islamabad at 9am, but was delayed till 1pm to accommodate the minister, leaving the body behind at the airport. Published in Dawn, May 11th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Downside risks for Pakistan remain exceptionally high: IMF
Description : Downside risks for the economy remain exceptionally high, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) said on Friday in its staff report ahead of the governments talks with the fund on a longer term progamme. An IMF mission is expected to visit the country this month to discuss a new programme, ahead of the government beginning its annual budget-making process for the next financial year. Downside risks remain exceptionally high. While the new government has indicated its intention to continue the SBAs (standby arrangement) policies, political uncertainty remains significant, said the fund in its staff report following the second and final review under the SBA.
The fund added that political complexities and high cost of living could weigh on policy, adding that policy slippages, together with lower external financing, could undermine the narrow path to debt sustainability and place pressure on the exchange rate. The IMF also said higher commodity prices and disruptions to shipping, or tighter global financial conditions, would also adversely affect external stability for the cash-strapped nation. The fund stressed the need for timely post-programme external financing disbursements.
Last month, the country completed a short-term $3 billion programme, which helped stave off sovereign default, but Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif has stressed the need for a fresh, longer term programme. Pakistan narrowly averted default last summer and the economy has stabilised after the completion of the last IMF programme with inflation coming down to around 17 per cent in April from a record high 38pc last May. The country is still dealing with a high fiscal shortfall and while the external account deficit has been controlled through import control mechanisms, it has come at the expense of stagnating growth, which is expected to be around 2pc this year compared to negative growth last year. Pakistan is expected to seek at least $6bn and request additional financing from the Fund under the Resilience and Sustainability Trust. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Pakistan remain unbeaten in Azlan Shah Cup as match with New Zealand ends in tie
Description : Pakistan on Friday secured a tie in their match against New Zealand in the 30th Azlan Shah Hockey Cup. Pakistans fifth match today, which was played in Malaysias Ipoh city at 1pm (PKT), saw them remain unbeaten throughout the tournament. The match ended in a draw, with both teams securing one point each, the Pakistan Hockey Federation (PHF) said.
View this post on Instagram
Senior player Ammad Shakeel is leading the 18-member squad with Abu Bakr as the vice-captain. Japan lead the points table with 13 points while Pakistan rank second with 11 points. New Zealand hold the third position with seven points while Malaysia follow them with a point less.
View this post on Instagram
According to the PHF, both Pakistan and New Zealand had not scored by half-time. New Zealand then succeeded in scoring a field goal in the 35th minute of the game. However, Abu Bakr amassed a goal for Pakistan in the 43rd minute while playing at the penalty corner. Pakistan and Japan had already qualified for the final match, which will take place at 5:30pm (PKT) on Saturday at the Azlan Shah Stadium in Ipoh, after winning their respective matches on Wednesday. Pakistan had defeated Canada 5-4 while Japan beat hosts Malaysia 2-1. According to Radio Pakistan, Pakistan have won their three matches against Malaysia, South Korea and Canada while the ones against Japan and New Zealand ended in a draw. Meanwhile, after their 3-1 victory against Canada today, Japan have four wins plus a draw. Earlier this month, head coach Roelant Oltmans had said he expected an improved show by Pakistan in the tournament. Oltmans, 69, has served Pakistans senior and junior teams in different roles since 2004 and was involved with the youth side in his most recent stint. Pakistan won the Azlan Shah Cup title thrice  in 1999, 2000 and 2003  and came third in the last edition which was also held in Ipoh in 2022. Malaysia are the defending champions of this years edition. Addressing the squad via video link, Information Minister Attaullah Tarar reiterated the governments commitment to hockey while also mentioning a campaign across all forms of media to highlight the teams achievements in the Azlan Shah Cup, according to a report from state-run Radio Pakistan. He added that the prime minister would focus on removing obstacles in the development of hockey in Pakistan. Tara said final would be broadcast nationwide tomorrow on Saturday and wished the team luck. The entire nation is praying for the victory of Pakistan and is looking forward to welcome a champion team. Rana Mashood Ahmed, chairman of the Prime Ministers Youth Programme, also congratulated the team for reaching the final after thirteen years. He added that Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif would also host the team on its return and address issues impeding hockeys development in the country. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Overflowing cups
Description : ON my travels in the last two years I noticed a new accessory: large water bottles. You know the ones with the straw protruding from its top? The most coveted one at the moment is the one which retails for around $45  which is roughly Rs12,000, but sells for Rs18,000 in some Karachi markets. This water bottle is a reminder of how our overconsumption is exacerbating the climate crisis. Despite all the evidence, it doesnt feel like a climate crisis when you look at our tendency to buy more  of everything. Plenty has been written about how bulk buying of clothes has accelerated fast fashion culture. These fast-moving trends have a devastating impact on the climate, from labour abuse in the garment industry to microfibres polluting Earth and water. The fashion industry is estimated to be responsible for 10 per cent of global carbon emissions, according to a 2020 report by the European Parliament. Although fashion houses will use terms like sustainable practices, only 1pc of used clothing is recycled into new clothes. The global textile production has doubled from 58 million tonnes in 2010 and is expected to grow to 145m tonnes by 2030, says the European Environment Agency. This is great news for world economies, except that it takes 200 years for some materials to decompose: synthetic fabrics like polyester, for example, break down into small plastic particles which last forever. This should horrify us, but one look at women lining up to buy the new XYZ designer lawn collection across Pakistan proves weve not grasped the severity of the climate crisis. Or care about it. I can sympathise with this, having heard people say how despondent they feel about the state of the  well, state; how change doesnt seem likely, so why care about the environment. My students, however, care very much about the environment, more than politicians do; they are inheriting a planet deluged in waste. But as valiant a generation this Z is proving  defying universitys bullying tactics for example  they are, according to studies, also the most likely to be influenced. Earlier, there was value attached to things and a sensibility too. Against this backdrop, whats the harm in buying a stainless steel cup which comes with a lifetime guarantee? Because it does not stop at one cup. You only have to go to TikTok to see the cupboards lined up with up to 37 different coloured cups of a single brand. People line up outside stores to buy the new release, there are sites dedicated to selling them. This particular company, which catered to blue collar workers in the US, has gone from earning $73m in 2019 to $750m last year, according to Vox. The companys claim, that it can keep cold drinks cold for 11 hours and hot drinks hot for seven hours, received an unlikely boost when, last year, a womans cup survived a car fire. The woman posted a Tik Tok (of course) of her burned-to-a-shell car, but the cup remained in its cup holder, and she rattled it to show the ice was still in it. This was marketing gold for the company, which bought the lady a new car and cup. It is this kind of marketing which adds to a products status and makes it more desirable. And causes a lot of problems for the environment. According to a story in the New York Times, producing one stainless steel water bottle was far more environmentally damaging than producing a plastic bottle. I recognise Im being more judgemental than usual, and while I am loathe to shame people for their choices, Im bothered by what these cups are selling  health as a status symbol. As Vox pointed out, people leave comments saying they are hydrated because of such cups. This idea extends to other wellness products: if you buy these clothes or these classes, you will unlock a better, healthier version of yourself, writes Vox. Health and hydration, like skin care, supplements, yoga pants etc, are part of a self-care trend that only fuels fast capitalism. Our elders were not immune to material acquisition, but there was value attached to things and a sensibility too. Clothes were upcycled, passed onto younger children, handed down as heirlooms even.  Today, it is easy to buy goods from the comfort of your phone, but it is not quenching our desire to want more. This desire is not helping our well-being, because retail therapy, as Time wrote last month, is tanking your mental health. How do we return to a time of stretching the shelf life of things, reusing, recycling, taming the beast in us that wants more irrespective of whether we need it? Simply by buying less, we will see a reduction in emissions and pollution. This is the goal we need to practise and teach our children as their future is at stake.  The writer is an instructor of journalism.  X: LedeingLady Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : The lethal troika
Description : MANY factors were responsible for the defeat of the erstwhile Soviet Union and then the US in Afghanistan. A common factor was the existence of a combination of extremely resilient militant groups resisting both superpowers. This combination consisted of three categories of militants: local Afghan militants resisting foreign invaders; Pakistani militants crossing over to help their Afghan brethren; and thousands of mujahideen from various countries, particularly in the Middle East, participating in the Afghan jihad. With some variations in their composition, role and external supporters, they fought together against the US and USSR for 30 years, forcing them to withdraw. Alarmingly, after the US withdrawal from Afghanistan in 2021, this Afghanistan-based lethal troika now targets Pakistan. The situation necessitates a fundamental shift in the terrorist threat assessment in Pakistan  from focusing exclusively on the Tehreek-i-Taliban Pakistan to broadening the threat calculus to the troika of the TTP, Afghan Taliban, and Al Qaeda. Concerning the nexus between the Taliban and TTP, the latest UN report on Afghanistan states that the Afghan government was supplying weapons, training facilities and regular financial packages to the TTP. Al Qaedas primary goal, after lying low in the region for many years, is to revive itself without annoying its Afghan hosts or attracting the Wests adverse attention. In view of this, it seems to have opted to carry out its activities in Pakistan through the TTP, while staying below the international radar. The importance Al Qaeda gives to the TTP is evident in that it selected 15 of its commanders to assist the group conduct terrorist attacks in Pakistan. It also supplied armed fighters to the TTP in its attack in Chitral in September 2023, which killed four security officials. Al Qaedas camp in Kunar, headed by Hakim ul Masri, is responsible for training suicide bombers for the TTP. The TTP, which has been the most lethal terrorist group in Pakistan over the last three years, is on the same page with the Taliban and Al Qaeda not only because of an ideological affinity and a shared history of fighting foreign invaders in Afghanistan, but also due to similar goals of Sharia enforcement in Pakistan. The TTP intends to replicate in Pakistan what the Taliban did in Afghanistan. There were reports of the TTP helping the other two members of the troika by killing Taliban members defecting to the rival Islamic State-Khorasan Province in Afghanistan. The basic point is that while the troika is united on targeting Pakistan, the members play different roles. The Taliban are likely to help TTP discreetly in Afghanistan by providing sanctuary, with Al Qaeda supporting both openly in Afghanistan through mentoring and in Pakistan through its sympathisers. With its edge, the TTP is likely to carry out ground attacks in Pakistan and lead a campaign to build up its narrative of violent extremism. As far as the strategy and tactics to be adopted by the troika go, the TTP intends to replicate in Pakistan what the Taliban did in Afghanistan. In a recent interview to Khorasan Diary, TTP ameer Noor Wali Mehsud stated, our jihad in Pakistan  has entered a decisive phase. He went on to say ominously: Pakistani security agencies have unjustly occupied our homeland and our goal is to liberate our homeland and implement the divine law. In a nutshell, the TTP seems to be falling back on the two-point narrative of resistance in Afghanistan, ie, liberation of homeland and enforcement of divine laws. This brings us to the likely impact of the troika on the terrorist threat landscape in Pakistan. Since 2021, the number of terrorist attacks in Pakistan has been consistently increasing every year. This is likely to continue in 2024, with three possible changes. One, the number of Afghan nationals taking part in terrorist attacks in Pakistan may increase  we recall here the suicide bombing against military personnel in 2023 in Bannu by Afghans. Two, given its penchant for high-profile attacks, Al Qaeda may train the TTP to carry out such attacks. Three, given that the top Al Qaeda and Taliban instructors will train TTP members, the quality and sophistication of the attacks in 2024 are likely to be enhanced. Another area likely to be impacted by the troika is infiltration. Earlier, in the 1990s, Al Qaeda infiltrated educational institutions such as Karachi and Punjab universities to recruit educated youth. These recruitment cells in universities may be reactivated. Also, to stay abreast of latest government planning in counterterrorism, the TTP, like the Taliban did in Afghanistan, may attempt to infiltrate government departments, including intel agencies. The third and most important dimension of infiltration is that of the military, which was carried out by Al Qaeda in Pakistan in the late 1990s. It may be pertinent to mention that the last attempted terrorist attack by Al Qaeda was in 2014 in Karachi, when a group of naval officers tried to hijack a navy frigate and crash into a US ship in the open seas. Al Qaeda worked somewhat openly in Pakistan from the 1980s to 2001, and built up an elaborate network of civilian volunteers in many cities of Pakistan, who assisted in collecting funds, recruiting volunteers, and providing hideouts for the group. These sleeper cells might again be contacted by it and reactivated. Similarly, there were some Pakistani militant organisations of the 1980s, like the Harkatul Mujahideen, Lashkar-e-Taiba, etc, sympathetic to Al Qaeda and lying low these days. Al Qaeda may re-establish contact with them and get their support for the TTP. Finally, both the Taliban and Al Qaeda are known for their high-quality propaganda campaign. The TTP media wing lacks that finesse. In the light of guidance from the Taliban and Al Qaeda, we are likely to witness a significant improvement in the quality of propaganda. As Sun Tsu stated, if you know your enemy and you know yourself, you need not fear the result of a hundred battles. Sadly, it seems that Pakistan is erring in assessing the collective capabilities of the TTP, supported by the Taliban and Al Qaeda. The writer is a former police officer who was Nactas first national coordinator. Published in Dawn, May 11th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Street safety
Description : THE Sindh chief executives resolve to address street crime is encouraging. This commitment raises important questions: are these crimes organised or opportunistic? Can traditional policing strategies alone be effective, or is a blend of conventional and technological methods required? How important is educating the public on safety measures for the prevention of street crime? Also, one must consider whether street crime is predominantly an urban or rural phenomenon. Street crimes typically include the snatching of mobile phones, cash, and motorcycles by individuals aged between 18 and 35. The environment, such as street lighting, architectural designs, and administrative practices, also plays a significant role in these incidents. Although initially appearing to be opportunistic, these crimes are increasingly becoming organised, driven by environmental and situational factors. They usually occur in densely populated and economically disadvantaged areas, particularly where there is minimal surveillance, such as lack of CCTV, private security, and alarm systems. Several factors contribute to the rise in street crime, including high unemployment rates, poverty, easy access to small arms, a low criminal conviction rate, enticing high-value items, insufficient police presence, low CCTV coverage, weak police-community collaboration, and limited public knowledge on safety practices. Hiring unverified labourers and domestic workers in urban areas like Karachi also plays a role. The psychological impact is significant, leading to increased feelings of insecurity and a rise in mental health issues among residents. Recent reports indicate a significant surge in street crime in Karachi, with daily occurrences of theft and violence. However, lengthy processes and low trust between police and the public often prevent victims from reporting crimes. Streamlining the process for registering FIRs could enhance public trust and provide more accurate crime data. Karachi Police, with a force of 44,000 personnel, dedicates only 13,500 to patrol duties, with the remainder assigned to non-patrol roles. This distribution poses challenges in effectively managing street crime, as traditional policing methods often result in unsuccessful investigations. Karachis unchecked demographic changes have led to the unregulated growth of slums, necessitating the establishment of a Slums Regulatory Authority to oversee these areas and ensure proper integration of newcomers from other cities with collaboration between union councils, police, and Nadra. To effectively prevent crime such as auto theft and ATM robberies, improvements in vehicle security, increased surveillance around ATMs, and greater police visibility are essential. To address such challenges in Pakistan, the police introduced the Ababeel, Mujahid, Shaheen, and Dolphin squads, but public expectations require a more proactive approach and technological backup. Traditional policing methods may result in faulty investigations. International examples, such as Malaysias successful strategies, can offer valuable insights. These include enhanced police visibility, identifying crime hotspots, and fostering police-community partnerships, which have proven effective in improving public safety and reducing crime rates. To effectively combat street crime, the police should harness advanced technologies like AI, CCTV and mobile apps to detect crime and aid their prevention. Facial and licence plate recognition are key to identifying and managing offenders, while GPS tracking is invaluable for recovering stolen vehicles and monitoring taxis. However, relying solely on technology is not enough to reduce street crime. Effective law enforcement and active community engagement are equally crucial. Police need increased mobility, and the motorcycle business, including vehicle registration, requires stringent regulation. Initiatives like Safe City projects should be launched in major cities such as Karachi to enhance urban security. As most street crimes occur after sunset, identifying and reinforcing hotspots with security and lightingand public education on safety are imperative. Improving the justice system is essential to addressing inefficiencies and corruption. Enhancing investigation quality, prosecution, and witness cooperation is vital for increasing conviction rates. Citizen education regarding the safe use of mobiles, safe car parking, using ATMs, etc, should be part of urban policing. For this purpose, all capital police departments in Pakistan should initiate citizen-police education initiatives, including through distance learning. A holistic approach involving technology, community engagement, political will, professional policing, and responsible citizenry is necessary to deter and defeat street crime.  The writer is author of Pakistan: In Between Extremism and Peace. Twitter: [@alibabakhel1] Published in Dawn, May 11th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Areas of cooperation with Saudi Arabia identified: PM Shehbaz
Description : PRIME Minister Shehbaz Sharif has termed Pakistans recent diplomatic deliberations with Saudi Arabia great progress, Geo News reported. In an interview with Arab news channel Al Arabiya English, the premier said, We have identified areas of mutual cooperation, both at the government-to-government and business-to-business levels and that have been clearly identified. We now have a clear-cut way forward. The PM highlighted that both countries would work on mutual cooperation and investments in the field of mines and minerals as well as renewable energy, among other fields. The interview comes days after a Saudi investors delegation visited Pakistan.
The premier spoke about his maiden visit to the kingdom after starting his new term as the countrys chief executive. He also mentioned the visits made by the Saudi government and business delegations to strengthen diplomatic and trade ties between the two nations. PM Shehbaz said his meetings with Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed Bin Salman were positive. In response to a question, the premier termed the recent Pak-Saudi investment conference very productive and fruitful. While sharing details of his vision for economic stability, the PM mentioned his recent visit to the kingdom to attend the World Economic Forum meetings in which the discussions revolved around increasing agricultural production in Pakistan with the help of modern equipment and technology. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Lender endorses status quo in SBPs policy rate
Description : KARACHI: The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has endorsed the State Bank of Pakistans (SBP) decision to keep the interest rate unchanged despite a sharp deceleration in inflation. The IMF-Pakistan SBA (2nd and Final Review) Country Report made it clear that the Fund was willing to see no change in the interest rate despite demand from the stakeholders in the wake of falling inflation, which has widened the gap between the 22 per cent interest rate and expected 13 to 15pc estimated CPI in May. The IMF staff endorsed the SBPs Monetary Policy Committee decision to maintain the policy rate, said the report. It is believed that the unprecedented interest rate has crippled economic growth, which is estimated to expand at 2pc in FY24 after contracting in FY23.  Most analysts and research houses believe that inflation in May is likely to be between 13 and 15pc, providing enough room to bring down the interest rate. However, the IMFs endorsement of SBPs decision to maintain a status quo indicates that it may be kept steady despite an expected gap of about 7 to 9pc between inflation and the policy rate.  The IMF report further said that any relaxation of the policy stance should be justified by evidence of declining inflation, controlled pass-through effects, and limited exchange rate pressures from forex market normalisation. The authorities remain committed to a flexible exchange rate and transparent interbank FX market, said the report. The IMF recommended the continued proactive accumulation of reserves through interbank purchases, noting positively that the reduction of the SBPs swap/forward position has alleviated forward premia compression, said the report. The IMF also cautioned that the recent stability of the rupee should not lead to expectations of its persistence in the future. Reforms for the sustainability of the power sector require solid cost-side reforms. The authorities need to speed up work on improving transmission and distribution infrastructure, Discos performance via privatisation or long-term management concession, moving captive demand to the national grid, revisiting terms of PPA where feasible, and converting Power Holding Private Ltd debt into cheaper public debt. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Art group employs brainwaves, AI to  recreate landscapes
Description : PARIS: The hypercolour image of a dark hill and lava flow is pretty enough  but its high-tech artificial intelligence origins make it special. It is the product of the brainwaves of one member of French art collective Obvious, collected in an MRI machine at the Brain Institute of the Pitie Salpetriere hospital in Paris. I was thinking very hard about a volcano, said Pierre Fautrel, one of the trio. He admits the resulting work was not exactly what he had in mind,  but it has kept the basic elements: a flaming mountain with flowing lava and a landscape on a light background. The trio of thirty-somethings, Fautrel, Hugo Caselles-Dupre and Gauthier Vernier, already gained international attention in 2018 by selling an AI-generated artwork at Christies in New York for more than 400,000 euros. For the latest project,  Mind to Image, they used an open-source programme, MindEye, which is able to retrieve and reconstruct viewed images from brain activity, combining it with their own AI programme to create artworks. They tried two different versions  one in which they looked at pictures and tried to replicate them simply through their brainwaves captured in the MRI. They also tried recreating their invented images based on written descriptions. For each, they repeated the process many times over 10 hours to create a database for their AI. Weve known for around 10 years that its possible to reconstruct a viewed image from the activity of the visual cortex, said Alizee Lopez-Persem, a researcher at the Brain Institute. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : FOOTBALL: GIRLS KICKING MOUNTAINS
Description : The ground faces the barren mountains of Quetta in Hazara Town  it feels like an otherworldly place, one where seeing girls in public is a common sight. The girls warm up for their football match under the infinite blue sky on a Sunday morning. Wearing black, beige and pink scarves and shorts with leggings, the players are enthusiastic and ready to play. As the match begins, the atmosphere charges up  someone kicks the football, another teammate shouts an instruction, theres a cheer here and a sigh there  and soon theres a goal to great celebration! These were scenes from the Womens Football Academy when Eos visited  it is one of the only three football academies for women in Hazara Town, Quetta, according to Zahra Afzal, the founder. Zahra, 26, started playing football professionally five years ago. She has played football championships in Karachi and was also a part of the Under-18 team in the National Games. A sports aficionado and a bronze medalist in lawn tennis, Zahra also plays badminton, hockey and cricket. But football is her favourite.  Zahra Afzal runs the Womens Football Academy in Hazara Town, Quetta. What made her get into such an apparently thankless job? Once you start playing football, you forget all other games, she tells Eos. Although her passion for football began in childhood, she couldnt play professionally because of a lack of football academies for women in Hazara Town. After graduating from Sardar Bahadur Khan Womens University with a degree in media sciences, Zahra started working as a coordinator in the Aria Institute of Medical Science and decided to start her own academy. It has not been easy for Zahra to start an academy in Quetta, especially in Hazara Town. Theres no government support, especially for the womens team. There are no sponsors here, unlike in the big cities, such as Karachi and Lahore, she shares, adding that, even after two years of starting out, they still have no sponsors.  With a lack of support, Zahra deals with the logistics of keeping the academy running on her own. The ground rent is expensive  it costs 800 rupees per hour, she points out. We use the ground daily for two hours. Theres a monthly fee of Rs500 charged from the players, but for those who cannot afford to pay, especially orphans, the fee is exempted. The day starts early for the players  they train for two hours every day from 6am to 8am. Sundays are match days. Almost 35 girls train at Zahras academy  most of them are studying in government schools and are children of Afghan immigrants. When news of the governments plans to deport Afghan refugees started circulating, many of the players stopped attending training. Their families would ask them to not go, fearing that theyd be picked up and deported, Zahra shares. She adds that two of her best players dropped out due to these fears. Sakina Nazari, 17, wasnt interested in football three months ago but now she dreams of pursuing a career in football. She was persuaded by a friend, who trains at the same academy, to start playing. Football is like therapy and is also good for fitness, Sakina tells Eos. I get a nice feeling when I play  it feels as if I have some control over something. When I wasnt playing football and stayed at home, I would have a general sense of lethargy, but since I started playing, I feel healthy. Sakinas comments about football being therapeutic resonate with many Hazara girls. In recent years, football has emerged as a game-changer for Hazara girls, as it offers solace to the persecuted-community.  For a long time, the Hazaras have been discriminated against, targeted by attacks and killed in bombings. In the last 14 years, more than 2,000 Hazaras have been reportedly killed, according to areportpublished by the National Commission of Human Rights Pakistan. As a Hazara I might not be able to make it far in football due to discrimination and lack of opportunities for our community, but I still want to give sports my best. We should be judged solely on the basis of our talent, she adds. While her family has been supportive, Sakina says society in general is very close-minded. When we go out in our tracksuits, we get weird glares and are subjected to judgement. Sometimes resistance comes from families too. In such cases, Zahra conducts meetings with the parents to convince them to allow their girls to play. Zahra shares that her vision is to not only train the girls in football but also to train them for life, so that theyre ready to face any challenge. Players from her academy have travelled to different cities and out of town for tournaments  an experience that has added to their confidence. More than the training, these events help them grow. The 34th National Games of Pakistan were hosted by Quetta last year and some six players from Zahras academy were selected to represent Balochistan. Aliya Shuja, 19, said she wants the government to invest in football. Its an important sport thats played internationally. We have so far only been focused on investing in and promoting cricket, she points out.  If the government would promote football, the youth would not go for drugs or bad deeds, she says, adding that they just need support and facilities from the government and are willing to pay a fee to train on government-supported grounds that have world-class training facilities. Aliya has been playing football for a long time but has been training at the academy for a month now. Her favourite football team is FC Barcelona and she looks up to Alexia Putellas, a Spanish footballer. I want to play in international leagues and make a career out of football, she says.  Dua Zahra, 15, was inspired by her father, a football coach. I want to be a keeper and my dad trained me at home, shares Dua, who has been playing at the academy for a year now.  Although her father is supportive of her dreams to pursue football as a career, her paternal grandmother often tells her football is not for girls. I just ignore what she says and continue playing, says Dua giggling. The writer is a freelance journalist.
X: @sommulbaloch Published in Dawn, EOS, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : No such thing as strategic state-owned enterprises, says Finance Minister Aurangzeb
Description : Finance Minister Muhammad Aurangzeb on Sunday said that there was no such thing as strategic state-owned enterprises (SOEs) as he stressed the need for privatisation. He made the remarks at a pre-budget conference in Lahore, two days after  Deputy Prime Minister Ishaq Dar said the government would limit its business only to strategic and essential SOEs under its domain but their number would be reduced from 40 after scrutiny. Chairing the Cabinet Committee on Privatisation (CCoP) meeting, which was attended by the finance minister, Dar said privatisation of loss-making SOEs would be a priority. The meeting noted that 40 SOEs were currently categorised as strategic or essential, but respective ministries would submit their details to the Cabinet Committee on State-Owned Enterprises (CCoSOE). The CCoSOE will determine the status of the SOEs to be categorised as strategic or essential entities. Speaking on Sunday, Aurangzeb said: There is no such as [a] strategic SOE. Talking about the meeting chaired by Dar on Friday, he continued, We are absolutely on the same wavelength  that there is no such thing as a strategic SOE. The finance minister said that a meeting would be held tomorrow where we will go back to various ministries and say that all this should be handed over to the private sector. There will be public-private partnership and we will accelerate the privatisation agenda, he said. Commenting on concerns regarding the privatisation of Pakistan International Airlines (PIA), Aurangzeb said the government was not just looking at foreign investors. They are local and foreign investors who are bidding [] there is no such thing that we are only looking at foreign investors, he said. Commenting on a fresh loan programme with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) programme, he said that a larger and longer programme was needed to bring permanence in macroeconomic stability and structural reforms. He also talked about energy reforms, saying that there were leakages and stressed the need for stopping theft. He said that changes were being brought to the boards of distribution companies (Discos) in order to bring in those from the private sector for better corporate governance. And then you will see how we bring those Discos towards concessions or privatisation or a combination of both, he emphasised. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : IMF mission to meet Pakistani authorities next week to discuss next phase of engagement: official
Description : An International Monetary Fund (IMF) mission will meet Pakistani authorities next week to discuss the next phase of engagement, an official from the international money lender said on Sunday. Speaking to Dawn.com, Esther Perez Ruiz, the Funds resident representative for Pakistan, said: A mission team led by Nathan Porter, IMFs mission chief to Pakistan, will meet with authorities next week to discuss the next phase of engagement. The aim is to lay the foundation for better governance and stronger, more inclusive, and resilient economic growth that will benefit all Pakistanis, she added. Pakistan last month completed a short-term $3 billion programme, which helped stave off sovereign default, but the government has stressed the need for a fresh, longer-term programme. Last week, the Fund said that a mission was expected to visit Pakistan this month to discuss the FY25 budget, policies, and reforms under a potential new programme for the welfare of all Pakistanis. Pakistan narrowly averted default last summer, and the $350bn economy has stabilised after the completion of the last IMF programme, with inflation coming down to around 17 per cent in April from a record high 38pc last May. The country is still dealing with a high fiscal shortfall and while the external account deficit has been controlled through import control mechanisms, it has come at the expense of stagnating growth, which is expected to be around 2pc this year compared to negative growth last year. Pakistan is expected to seek at least $6bn and request additional financing from the Fund under the Resilience and Sustainability Trust. On Friday, the Fund said that downside risks for the economy remain exceptionally high. Downside risks remain exceptionally high. While the new government has indicated its intention to continue the SBAs (standby arrangement) policies, political uncertainty remains significant, said the IMF in its staff report following the second and final review under the standby agreement. The Fund added that political complexities and high cost of living could weigh on policy, adding that policy slippages, together with lower external financing, could undermine the narrow path to debt sustainability and place pressure on the exchange rate. The IMF also said higher commodity prices and disruptions to shipping, or tighter global financial conditions, would also adversely affect external stability for the cash-strapped nation. The fund stressed the need for timely post-programme external financing disbursements. Additional input from Reuters Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Situation in AJK calms down after 2 days of violent clashes
Description : Following violent clashes over the last 48 hours, which left a policeman dead, the situation in Muzaffarabad seemed to have calmed down on Sunday, with a Rangers detachment that was sent to Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK) from Kohala having been withdrawn. AJK witnessed violent clashes between the police and activists of a rights movement amid a wheel-jam and shutter-down strike across the territory on Friday and Saturday, which left at least one police official dead and more than 90 others injured, officials told Dawn.com on Saturday. Mirpur Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP) Kamran Ali had said that Sub-inspector Adnan Qureshi succumbed to a gunshot wound in the chest in the town of Islamgarh, where he was deployed to stop a rally for Muzaffarabad under the banner of the Jammu Kashmir Joint Awami Action Committee (JAAC). The JAAC, which has traders at the forefront in most parts of the state, has been seeking the provision of electricity as per hydropower generation cost in AJK, subsidised wheat flour and an end to the privileges of the elite class. They called for the strike following the arrest of at least 70 of their members in raids on Thursday. Reports emerged in the wake of the protests on Sunday that three Rangers battalions had entered the territory through Kohala and were awaiting further orders. However, AJK Minister for Rural Development Faisal Mumtaz Rathore confirmed that the Rangers, due to the intervention of President Asif Zardari, were called back as soon as they entered Azad Kashmir since the situation had calmed down. Meanwhile, in Islamabad, former prime minister of AJK Sardar Abdul Qayyum Niazi slammed the deployment, calling it a drama and an attempt to score political points. First they send them, then call them back, what is this? the ex-AJK PM said. Those fighting for their rights and engaging in protest are free to do so, but they must remain peaceful, Niazi said in a press conference. He added that they (the protestors) must not give the enemy a chance to sow discord within the territory and create infighting. In a post on Facebook, Rathore acknowledged the public demands for cheap electricity, but admitted that addressing them was out of his hands. The big demand of the people, the demand for cheap electricity and the end of loadshedding, falls under the jurisdiction of the Government of Pakistan, Rathore said. Urging the public to remain peaceful, he said, In this one year [I have been in office], I have never been against the right to peaceful protest and [never] supported violence against people. In the aftermath of the protests, JAAC leader Shaukat Nawaz Mir reiterated that the committee is a peaceful organisation and willing to negotiate with the authorities to ensure the provision of cheap electricity and cheap flour. He also appreciated the withdrawal of the Rangers from the area. We have planned another shutter-down strike, he told reporters on Sunday. We have been peaceful for the last year and always will be a peaceful movement. This territory and its institutions and police are our own. Mir maintained that the JAAC is advocating for the rights of the public in AJK, but it is the bureaucrats who do not understand the publics needs that are doing the damage. The JAAC is peaceful and open to negotiations, Mir added, requesting to be notified by the authorities about decisions taken. We do not want to hurt anyone. He also slammed the federal government for not cutting down spending while at the same time claiming they have no room in the budget to subsidise electricity or flour. The government claims they cant provide cheap electricity and flour because they have no budget, but they have the money for watches and cars, Mir said, adding that the federal government and the prime minister should be ashamed. I dont want my forum to be controversial, Mir said. We are made up of respectable politicians  the local council is standing with us. The JAAC leader added that the movement was successful since members of multiple parties and councils are on our side. Our nation is conscious now. There is no politics here, we just want our rights and identity. Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif has taken notice of the situation in AJK and urged PML-N leadership and AJK prime minister Chaudhry Anwar-ul-Haq to pursue negotiations with the JAAC. Posting on X, he said, While debate, discussion and peaceful protests are the beauties of democracy, there should be absolutely no tolerance for taking the law in ones own hands and damaging government properties. He added that amidst situations of chaos and dissent, there will always be people who rush in to score political points.
The prime minister said that he was in contact with PML-N leaders and the AJK government, urging them to talk to the JAAC and resort to [a] peaceful course of action for resolution of their (JAACs) demands. Shehbaz added that despite the efforts of detractors, the issue will be resolved soon. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Fight till the last ball, PCB chief tells cricket team in Dublin
Description : Pakistan Cricket Board (PCB) Chairman Mohsin Naqvi on Sunday told the national team to fight till the last ball ahead of the second match of a three-match T20 series against Ireland. As he met players of the mens national team in the Irish capital of Dublin, the PCB quoted him as saying: Fight till the last ball; the competition should be apparent.
On Friday, Ireland recorded their maiden T20 win against Pakistan who could not defend a solid-looking 182-5 after being put in to bat first, dealing a shocking blow to the Babar Azam-led sides preparations for the World Cup, which is taking place next month in the United States. The loss to Ireland, who are in Pakistans group in the T20 World Cup, came after a series draw on home soil to a New Zealand squad missing most of their first-choice players. With Babar only recently reinstated as captain, it was another bump in the road for their tournament preparation.
Todays match will start at 7pm, with Ireland leading the series by 1-0. In a post on X, the PCB shared a video of Naqvi meeting the Green Shirts and speaking to them, adding that a detailed discussion on the action plan took place during the two-hour-long meetup. Encouraging the team, the PCB chairman urged the players to play with hard work, passion and a professional approach. He noted that T20 cricket needed a unique and aggressive approach, adding that victory was only possible if cricket was played in a modern manner. An action plan can be formulated while sitting in a room but the real test is on the ground, where the performance should be visible, the PCB quoted him as telling the team. Naqvi praised all players as undoubtedly talented, professional and the best, adding that the teams bowling attack was splendid. However, he emphasised that great attention was required when fielding so that the opponent cannot get any chance to score. The players are the hope for Pakistan and you have to meet the nations expectations. Teamwork is the fundamental thing for victory, the PCB chairman said. He noted that the public loved cricket and had expectations from the team. Naqvi said that success would come if all 11 of the players in the team performed with unity. No one is accepting the loss in the first match against Ireland. The real test after Ireland and England is the World Cup, he added. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Canada arrests fourth Indian national in killing of Sikh activist
Description : A fourth Indian national was charged by Canadian authorities on Saturday in the 2023 killing of a separatist Sikh leader in Vancouver. Amandeep Singh, 22, was already being held for unrelated gun charges before being charged with first-degree murder and conspiracy to commit murder in the slaying of Hardeep Singh Nijjar. Three other Indian nationals were arrested this month. The killing sparked a diplomatic row between Ottawa and New Delhi when Prime Minister Justin Trudeau linked Indian intelligence to the killing. Nijjar  who immigrated to Canada in 1997 and became a citizen in 2015  had advocated for a separate Sikh state, known as Khalistan, carved out of India. He had been wanted by Indian authorities for alleged terrorism and conspiracy to commit murder  allegations he denied. He was shot dead on June 18, 2023, by masked assailants in the parking lot of the Sikh temple he led in suburban Vancouver. Trudeau announced several months later that Canada had credible allegations connecting Indian intelligence to the slaying. India dismissed the allegations as absurd and responded furiously, briefly curbing visas for Canadians and forcing Ottawa to withdraw diplomats. In November, the US Justice Department charged an Indian citizen living in the Czech Republic with allegedly plotting a similar assassination attempt on American soil. Prosecutors said in unsealed court documents that an Indian government official was also involved in the planning. The shock allegations came after US President Joe Biden hosted Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi for a rare state visit, as Washington seeks closer ties with India against Chinas growing influence. US intelligence agencies have assessed that the plot on American soil was approved by Indias top spy official at the time, Samant Goel, the Washington Post reported in April. Canada is home to some 770,000 Sikhs, who make up about two per cent of the countrys population, with a vocal minority calling for an independent state of Khalistan. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Second night of auroras seen amid extreme solar storm
Description : Auroras lit up skies across swaths of the planet for the second night in a row on Saturday, after already dazzling Earthlings from the United States to Tasmania to the Bahamas the day before. A powerful solar storm  which could continue into Sunday  has triggered spectacular celestial shows usually confined to the far northern reaches of the planet, hence their nickname of the northern lights. I have the sensation of living through a historic night in France [] It was really charged, with solar particles and emotions, Eric Lagadec, an astrophysicist at the Observatoire de Cote dAzur, wrote on social media after the first night. Find good spots, away from the lights, with a clear view to the north! Late on Saturday evening, pictures again started trickling onto social media as people in the United States reported sightings, though not as strong as Friday nights. The first of several coronal mass ejections (CMEs)  expulsions of plasma and magnetic fields from the Sun   came just after 4pm GMT on Friday, according to the US-based National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)s Space Weather Prediction Center (SWPC). It was later upgraded to an extreme geomagnetic storm   the first since the Halloween Storms of October 2003 that caused blackouts in Sweden and damaged power infrastructure in South Africa. Fridays storm was listed as hitting level five geomagnetic conditions  the highest on the scale. Saturday saw G3 to G5 conditions, with G4 or higher conditions predicted Sunday and G3 conditions possible into Monday. But no major disruptions to power or communications networks appear to have been reported this time around, despite initial worries from authorities. There have only been preliminary reports of power grid irregularities, degradation to high-frequency communications, GPS and possibly satellite navigation, the SWPC said. Elon Musk, whose Starlink satellite internet operator has some 5,000 satellites in low Earth orbit, said his satellites were under a lot of pressure, but holding up so far. However Chinas National Centre for Space Weather issued a red alert on Saturday morning, warning the storm will impact communications and navigation in most areas of the country, state news agency Xinhua reported. Auroras were visible in the northern half of the country, according to media reports. Excitement over the phenomenon   and otherworldly photos of pink, green and purple night skies   popped up across the world, from Mont Saint-Michel on the French coast to Payette, Idaho  in the western United States  to Australias island state of Tasmania.
People pose for photos as a geomagnetic storm lights up the night sky above the Bonneville Salt Flats on May 10 in Wendover, Utah.  AFP
Unlike solar flares, which travel at the speed of light and reach Earth in around eight minutes, CMEs travel at a more sedate pace, with officials putting the current average at 800 kilometres per second. The CMEs emanated from a massive sunspot cluster that is 17 times wider than our planet. People with eclipse glasses can also look for the sunspot cluster during the day. The Sun is approaching the peak of an 11-year cycle that brings heightened activity. NOAAs Brent Gordon encouraged the public to try to capture the night sky with phone cameras even if they couldnt see auroras with their naked eyes. Youd be amazed at what you see in that picture versus what you see with your eyes. Fluctuating magnetic fields associated with geomagnetic storms induce currents in long wires, including power lines, which can potentially lead to blackouts. Long pipelines can also become electrified, leading to engineering problems. Spacecraft are also at risk from high doses of radiation, although the atmosphere prevents this from reaching Earth. NASA has a dedicated team looking into astronaut safety and can ask astronauts on the International Space Station to move to places within the outpost that are better shielded. Even pigeons and other species that have internal biological compasses could be affected. Pigeon handlers have noted a reduction in birds coming home during geomagnetic storms, according to NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The most powerful geomagnetic storm in recorded history, known as the Carrington Event after British astronomer Richard Carrington, occurred in September 1859. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : ADB links support with IMFs clean chit
Description :   Given my interactions with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the dialogue decisiveness of the current government, I feel very hopeful that there will be a successor programme from the Fund, said the Asian Development Banks (ADB) Country Director for Pakistan Yong Ye in an exclusive interview on the sidelines of ADBs 57th Annual Meeting in Tbilisi this week. Tacitly indicating that support from ADB would only be possible with a clean chit from the Fund, Mr Ye expressed cautious optimism for the economy. Highlighting the uncertainties from last year, Mr Ye termed the IMF agreement announced in June as a miracle. Since then, however, he said, the caretaker government did a good job stabilising the economy under the Funds Stand-By Arrangement. More importantly, he added, with the IMF agreement in place, the central banks foreign exchange reserves increased from $4.4 billion to over $9bn in the week ending on May 3. While the country may still be in the ICU, its immediate liquidity crisis has been sorted, and default has been avoided. This has given some confidence to the markets, he said. Record highs of PSX Commenting on the frequent new highs of the Pakistan Stock Exchange (PSX), Mr Ye observed that previously, when the eurobond payment was due, there had been a lot of hype in the media with speculations about whether the country would be able to repay or default. Such pieces did not induce courage and the markets started fluctuating, contributing to a fluctuating exchange rate. Banks top official says Pakistan has sorted out immediate liquidity crisis, but still in ICU This time around, in April, when the $1bn eurobond payment was due, it was paid without fanfare, indicating much better market confidence. Other positive indicators, such as a narrowing external account deficit and recovering remittances, have also improved investor confidence. However, fiscal deficit challenges remain. One major reason behind them is the high interest rate and high debt servicing burden. Act on what you know In my first meeting with Finance Minister Muhammad Aurangzeb, he showed his commitment to implementing and acting on reforms, said Mr Ye. Pakistan does not need more economic prescriptions, he said, agreeing with the finance ministers recent statements. He said the general perception is that Pakistan knows what it needs to do but never does it. Act on what you know needs to be done. He emphasised that the ADB management wants to be with the government in this difficult time. The agency understands the need to ensure that the debt is sustainable rather than an added burden that does not remove the constraints the country is facing. While the economy is recovering, there is still uncertainty moving forward. The removal of this uncertainty depends very much on the governments commitment and ability to implement economic and structural reforms. A special arrangement Mr Ye emphasised the importance of investment in reviving the economy and the role the Special Investment Facilitation Council (SIFC) could play. My understanding of SIFC is that it is a special arrangement to attract foreign direct investment from some targeted countries, he said. From the ADBs point of view, while the SIFC may be a quick short-term solution, Pakistan still needs to look for long-term systematic solutions to attract foreign direct investment. This would require an overall enabling environment with improved regulations and transparency. Given past unsuccessful incidents such as Reko Diq, SIFC, at least in the short run, can demonstrate the countrys potential and ability for investment, which can then be further broadened for other countries. An important element in attracting FDI is the ability of firms to repatriate profit out of the country. At the moment, investors may believe that while earning money in Pakistan is possible, repatriating profits is challenging. Non-productivity of real estate The country needs to increase its revenue and rationalise expenditures, Mr Ye remarked. As an example, he highlights the real estate sector where a lot of savings are invested. The real estate sector is just financial addition with no value addition. If the country invests in its natural resources instead, the country will start rolling, he said. Inflation is on a downward trend, and if this trend continues, the monetary policy rate will come down, Mr Ye opinioned, resulting in a smaller burden of debt servicing and more fiscal room. This will also unlock the investment and borrowing by the private sector, he hoped. Since there is a lot of pent-up investment demand during the period of high interest rates, Pakistan may enter into a boom cycle when the rates start coming down. But for the revival to be sustainable, it all comes back to reforms, he said.  Remaining pledges While ADB was among the institutions that pledged support after the disastrous floods of 2022, almost the entire amount has yet to be disbursed. ADB had pledged about $1.5bn, of which only $108.79 million has been released according to a media report, with a further $340.9m expected this year. In response to why there has been a delay, Mr Ye said that the amount pledged was for reconstruction and that the process cannot be rushed. The damages have to be assessed along with the ground realities, keeping in mind the new climate risk profile and the possibility that these areas may be flooded again, he said. Pointing out that water was still standing in some areas till the start of this year, Mr Ye said that the new climate risk profile needs to be assessed before the feasibility study. Some roads need to be redesigned, followed by the procurement process, contract award, and finally, disbursement. The entire process is lengthy. Mr Ye identified several critical areas for Pakistans long-term economic growth. These include controlling inflation, reducing the fiscal deficit, and diversifying the export base. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Govt hints at raising wheat purchase target
Description :  Drive to buy 400,000 tonnes of grain kicks off; farmers want wheat procured from across Punjab
 Kissan leader urges govt to ensure official rate of staple, terms proposed subsidy a pittance LAHORE: The Pakistan Agricultural Storage and Services Corporation Limited (Passco) on Saturday began its second phase of wheat procurement from Faisalabad in line with a decision of the federal government to procure 400,000 tonnes more than the original target of 1.4 million tonnes. As he kick-started the second phase, Food Minister Rana Tanveer hinted at the possibility of further increasing the target to facilitate farmers. Passco had originally aimed to purchase 1.4m tonnes, but after farmers started protesting, the pressure on the federal and provincial governments piled on and the premier decided to increase the target to 1.8m tonnes. As of now, Passco has achieved 98 per cent of the initial target and distribution of gunny bags is already underway to meet the increased target. Farmers, however, are not happy with the governments decision to procure slightly more wheat than intended. They said Passco  a federal body  operated in 13 out of 97 tehsils in Punjab and the decision to purchase additional wheat from designated areas would have a negligible impact. According to farmers, the tradeable surplus this year is expected to be about 10m tonnes and buying 400,000 tonnes would hardly make any difference. Punjab, on the other hand, is reluctant to procure wheat from growers despite province-wide agitations and the persistent stance of farmers. This has also caused a significant impact on the price of wheat, with the staple being sold at a rate much lower than the official price of Rs3,900 per 40kg. The Pakistan Kissan Ittehad claimed that farmers had lost Rs1,150 billion under the wheat head alone due to the crashing prices which reportedly dipped below Rs3,000 per 40kg. Instead of procurement, the Punjab government said it would compensate farmers with interest-free loans of Rs150bn. Kissan leader Khalid Mahmood Khokar, however, is not impressed, saying the paltry subsidy came at a cost of Rs1,150bn. Instead of this gimmickry, please ensure an officially declared price, which the provincial government had itself calculated, announced, and promised, Mr Khalid urged the Punjab government. The crisis Pakistan is going through the most difficult wheat season of its history, exacerbated by policy failure and the import of millions of tonnes of wheat shortly before the bumper harvest. The bumper crop followed a record import of 3.5m tonnes by the private sector allegedly due to the weakness of the caretaker regime.
Against the backdrop of such a huge import, hoarders also released their stock to earn profit. The releases of stock by the hoarders and the import of the commodity flooded the market and even met the entire domestic requirement, leaving Passco and the Punjab Food Department with 4m tonnes of unexhausted stock. The 3.5m tonnes imports were staggered in a way, in the name of sustained supplies, that it overlapped with domestic harvesting season and created havoc for the domestic market, explained Muhammad Ramzan, a wheat trader from Lahore. At the start of this month, the Punjab government had promised a probe into the wheat scandal against the backdrop of protests by the farmers. On Friday, the farmers resumed their protests from Multan against the provincial governments decision to not buy wheat from farmers. At the protest, PKI leader Khokhar had said the agitation would continue against the government in every district of the province till the acceptance of their demands. He had said the federal government was procuring the wheat in 16 tehsils of the province, while the Punjab government had not purchased even a single grain so far. Federal government should also buy wheat from other tehsils of the province, he had demanded. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : KP governor, CM Gandapur exchange threats in acrid spat
Description : PESHAWAR / DERA ISMAIL KHAN: The acrimony between Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Chief Minister Ali Amin Khan Gandapur and Governor Faisal Karim Kundi intensified on Saturday when the two leaders threatened each other with dire consequences. A day after the governors fiery speech, Chief Minister Gandapur warned Governor Kundi to stay within the limits of his constitutional position and avoid making olitical statements. After appearing in an anti-terrorism court in connection with the murder of former KP law minister Sardar Israrullah Khan Gandapur, the CM who belongs to the PTI said he could use his powers to banish Mr Kundi from Governor House. This Governor House is not your property. Dont force me to  turn it into a museum and open it for the public.
I will shift you to a two-room annexe, said Mr Gandapur. He went on to say that even fuel for the governors official vehicles comes from the budget of the provincial government and threatened to stop it if the governor who belongs to PPP didnt refrain from political statements, below-the-belt remarks and confrontation. Gandapur warns Kundi will be banished from official residence for indulging in politics, confrontation Youre the governor; politics is not your job, Mr Gandapur warned, calling himself the elected representative who came to power with the voters mandate. The CM added that if the governor did not pay heed to his warning, he would seek his removal. [T]he letter which notified you [as governor] will also denotify you. In a hard-hitting speech on Friday, Governor Kundi had indirectly accused the CM of being involved in the killing of former law minister Mr Israrullah and ANP leader Umar Khattab Sherani.
Mr Israrullah was killed in a suicide attack in his hometown of Kulachi near Dera Ismail Khan in October 2013. While government officials blamed the Waziristan-based Gandapur group for the bombing, a little-known shadowy group, Ansarul Mujahideen, claimed responsibility. ANPs Mr Sherani was murdered in December 2021, a day before the provinces local government elections, which he was contesting as a candidate for the post of D.I. Khan mayor. The governor said that if he relinquished his constitutional post, he would prove to be a bigger nemesis for CM Gandapur. Mr Kundi also warned that protecting the Governor House was his constitutional duty and whoever tried to occupy it would be dragged on roads. This was an apparent reply to Mr Gandapurs May 9 statement in which he warned against efforts to impose governors rule in KP and said PTI activists would occupy the Governor House. Want good ties with CM Meanwhile, in conversation with Dawn, Mr Kundi said he hoped for good relations with the chief minister, but whoever talked about occupying the Governor House will be answered befittingly. People of KP shouldnt suffer in the fight between the prime minister, governor and chief minister, he said, advising the provincial government to improve the law and order situation. He recalled the kidnapping of a sessions judge in Tank last month and claimed the chief minister paid extortion money for his release. Expected animosity The acrimonious relationship between the two leaders  both being bitter political rivals hailing from D.I.Khan  was expected since Mr Kundi was nominated for the post by his partys chairman, Bilawal Bhutto-Zardari. The CM expressed his disapproval of the appointment by not attending  Mr Kundis oath-taking ceremony last Saturday. A few days later, on May 8, the governor KP did not sign a summary moved by the provincial government to convene an assembly session, forcing the provincial government to requisition the session through the speaker to present the current fiscal budget, according to sources. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Footprints: the day the city of Karachi went berserk
Description : This article was originally published on May 12, 2017 KARACHI: Attempt after attempt fails to elicit comments from direct witnesses to the carnage that took place in Karachi on May 12 ten years ago. All these men served as judges in the countrys high courts and the apex court before they retired to re-join the legal fraternity as seasoned practitioners of the law. For each of my requests, I receive either excuse me, or sorry. Finally, one of them agrees to talk  but not openly.  Please dont mention my name, says the retired Sindh High Court judge as our conversation ends. You may write each and every word I have shared with you but not my name. I would prefer to be an anonymous source. One never knows here what can happen the next day: its better to stay away from even the memories of such controversial events. The ordeal he recalls of that bloody Saturday refreshes the grim memories of the city being under siege for nearly 24 hours, held hostage by forces in the face of whom even jurists and law-enforcers were helpless.  Two rival rallies had been planned that day  one by the legal fraternity, backed by parties then in the opposition, to welcome into the city the then deposed chief justice, Iftikhar Mohammed Chaudhry, and the other organised by the Muttahida Qaumi Movement (MQM), favoured by the then military dictator General Pervez Musharraf, in protest against the politicisation of the issue of the presidential reference against Mr Chaudhry. A certain level of fear had prevailed, but no one could have guessed the deeply disturbing events that were to follow  certainly not the then serving high court judge. I was travelling with my driver and armed guard to the Sindh High Court where the chief justice had to deliver an address when we were forced to stop near Sir Syed Girls College in Nazimabad, he says.  Armed motorcyclists surrounded his official, flag-bearing car, pulled out his driver and switched off its engine, seizing the keys. The bikers then bludgeoned the stationary car several times, so hard that its bumper fell off. In one of the busiest and most densely populated city neighbourhoods, a serving judge sat in fear.  I talked to them, he says. They were obviously aware that I was a high court judge. After debate and argument, they allowed me to leave but I reminded them that I couldnt because keys of my car had been snatched by one of them. Finally, the key was returned and the judge was allowed to leave. As he got back into his car, the men surrounding him came up with their last strike: they stripped his car of the national flag. At the nearest police station of Pak Colony, he waited for nearly two hours for police security to arrive, as promised by the Governors House after it was informed about the episode. Then came an SSP-ranking officer with his team to escort me, he says. The police left us some two kilometres from the Singh High Court building, saying that they could no longer help us. My driver parked the car at a safer place. Then, with my driver and guard, I walked to the high court to find all entrances blocked. Finally, I jumped over one of the walls to enter the building. If this was the experience of a high court judge, one can only imagine the situation for political workers. In anticipation of the two rallies, law enforcers had been put on high alert the day before. The fire brigade had been directed to remain on standby and hospitals were asked to ready themselves. But the next day, hapless citizens found that the city had been abandoned by the law-enforcement agencies, and armed youths were wandering at will. Nasir Khan, one of the Awami National Party workers, witnessed a few of them at Malir Halt. I meet Nasir almost at the same spot where he narrowly escaped death. As our rally from Quaidabad reached here [Malir Halt], it came under fire, he says. I miraculously remained unhurt but I watched two of my friends die from bullet wounds and several others fell injured. It was a terrible experience and even today I shiver while recalling that day. After 10 years, only eyewitness accounts of the May 12 events remain. Justice and any action on the part of the state are still awaited. Should we call ourselves humanity when the fallen remain un-avenged a year to a day since that fateful day in May? wrote Justice Qazi Faez Isa, a Supreme Court judge and former chief justice of the Balochistan High Court, in this paper in 2008. Years later, the question remains pertinent. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2017  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Mothers Day: Reflections of a mother
Description : This piece was originally published in Dawn, Young World on May 9, 2020. Spending sleepless nights while tending to children, feeding them, changing diapers, etc. are a part of life of every mother having infants. When the infants grow up a little, the next phase is to educate them, teach them manners and make them learn to be a part of the world out there. It is tough to do all that for me, like every other mother. After all it is not all I have to do. One has to focus on ones career and household chores at the same time, and fulfil ones duties towards other family members. Did I mention a me-time somewhere in all that I said? I guess not. There is no mentioning of it simply because there is no time left for me while doing all that I do. It is said that you learn about the true value of parents once you have children of your own. I have found this to be exactly true. The sacrifices and unconditional love it takes to be a mother has certainly made me realise the sacrifices my mother made in bringing me up. Looking back at my life, I wish I could change all those moments in my life when, as a child, I misbehaved with my mother. I also wish that I had spent more time with her and made life easier for her. As my children grow up, they seem to become less obedient and respectful. This really hurts. I see this as a general trend in all the children, nowadays. With some exceptions, the older they get, the less respect they show to their mother and elders in general. Having a mind of ones own is fine, but there cannot be any excuse for bad behaviour towards ones mother. And also just because your mother is less strict and more friendly than your father, it should not lead you to not show respect to her. Mothers like me do not want our children to be our puppets. All we ask for is recognition of our love and efforts. Expecting respectfulness is a part of that recognition. Every mother would love her child to come up to her and, as a minimum, thank her for her efforts. It would be great if the child could offer to help her in little ways. If nothing else, they should at least not leave any mess for the mother to clean up! Mothers Day is important, but it is more than just a special day. It is really a reminder that mothers deserve our respect and recognition for their love at all times. For a child to have this realisation certainly means more to mothers than having a card or flowers on Mothers Day. This is because it means that this realisation would translate into care and respect for ones mother. For my part, I have started taking care of my mother in all the ways I can. While I do not live with her, I try my best to stay in touch or visit her as much as I can. Taking care of her health and what she wants has become very important for me. It does not matter to me what others do or say about taking care of their mothers. All that matters is what my mother deserves. And that exactly is my message to you all! Do not look at what others do, think of what you can do for your mother, who deserves all the love and respect that one can. Mothers can be your friends too if you learn to share things with her. It is just a misunderstanding that they would not understand you or what you want. You can talk about anything with her: sports, cartoons, TV shows, super heroes, general knowledge, etc. You would be pleasantly surprised when you do end up confiding in her or discussing things with her. I am lucky that I get cards and flowers from my family on Mothers Day. But many things remain left to be desired on the other 364 days of the year. Still whatever my children do the rest of the year, I would never stop caring for and loving them. I guess thats what the motherhood is all about. Happy Mothers Day everyone, but make every day Mothers Day, for she never fails to make everyday special for her children. Published in Dawn, Young World, May 9th, 2020 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Indian elections
Description : THE Islamophobic rhetoric being employed by Narendra Modi for this election campaign has become shrill. Pakistan has nearly always been an electoral issue in India. However, this time, it is Indian Muslims who are bearing the brunt of the Indian prime ministers hate speech. Speaking in Rajasthan last month, he called Muslims infiltrators and said they produce too many children. In Gujarat, where, as chief minister, he had overseen the massacre of Muslims in 2002, he accused the Congress of seeking to loot Indias wealth and redistribute it among Muslims, and of organising a vote jihad against his leadership. Later, he accused the Congress and Muslims of stealing Hindu wealth and property.
Modis inflammatory rhetoric was followed by the BJPs campaign video portraying Muslims as outsiders who plundered Indias wealth. As concerns grew about communal violence, the video was removed. These allegations are a sequel to Modis public referencing of earlier conspiracy theories of love jihad (Muslims forcibly converting Hindu women and marrying them to increase the Muslim population) or land jihad (capturing land to construct religious structures and gaining control of Indias territory). Concerns that his rhetoric might incite further violence against Indian Muslims are increasing. Ordinarily, since Hindus are in a majority in India, it may be difficult to question the rationale of creating a Hindu state. However, two observations are in order. One, the expansionist designs of the cherished Hindu state seek the creation of an Akhand Bharat, a Hindu right fantasy, which would violate the territorial integrity of Nepal, Bangladesh, Pakistan, and Afghanistan, as per a map displayed in the new parliament building. This is not acceptable to the aforementioned independent states. Two, though the creation of a Hindu state should not translate into discrimination against minorities, regrettably this will be the case. The works of French political scientist Christophe Jaffrelot illustrate how Muslims, 14.5 per cent of Indias population, are grossly underrepresented in bureaucracy, the judiciary, police, and legislative organs. They are second-class citizens.
The Muslim-majority area of Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmiri is also being subjected to demographic engineering. The destruction of the centuries-old Babri Masjid by Hindu zealots in 1992 and the construction of a temple in its place has set a precedent that might be followed for other historic mosques. This contrasts sharply with the UAEs gesture of permitting a Hindu temple in Abu Dhabi. Modis anti-Muslim rhetoric is raising concerns of violence. Analysts are also pointing out the fascist tendencies of the BJP regime, a steep decline in democratic values, and a departure from the moorings of pluralism and secularism on which modern India was founded. In her book The Incarcerations, Alpa Shah contends that Modis India is using its national security apparatus to incarcerate ordinary citizens for their dissenting views. Commenting on the book, Arundhati Roy stated that this was about criminalisation and incarceration of dissent itself. Strikingly, the Modi regime has also used art and culture to project the Hindutva philosophy. Kunal Purohits book H-Pop: The Secretive World of Hindutva Pop Stars shows how Hindutva pop stars and influencers are being used to spread the message of Hindu supremacy and create acceptance of Hindutvas core beliefs. Apart from this, Modi is playing on his governments accomplishments: making India the worlds fifth largest economy; the construction of 50,000 kilometres of national highways; boosting Indias military spending; building Vikrant, Indias first domestically built aircraft carrier; and the Chandrayaan-3 moon landing. His prospects of winning a third term have been bolstered by a weak opposition. Despite the formation of the Congress-led 37-party INDIA coalition, there is no real challenge. What has bolstered his outreach is Indias enhanced global standing. In his book Why Bharat Matters, S. Jaishankar presents India as a leader of the global south and makes a case for the rejuvenation of India as a civilisational state.
There are some lessons that Pakistan could learn from Indias electoral process. One, despite the large scale of Indias elections (969 million registered voters; 1m polling stations) and the use of electronic voting machines, election results are largely accepted without much ado. Two, there is no caretaker government, as the incumbents become caretakers in a way, and refrain from announcing major policy decisions or sanctioning expenditure for development schemes. If Modi wins a third term, he is likely to maintain his pro-Hindutva, anti-Muslim, and hegemonic attitude towards regional countries, particularly Pakistan. The write is a former foreign secretary and chairman of Sanober Institute Islamabad. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Who can rock the hybrid boat?
Description : A NUMBER of developments over the past week suggest that the establishment is keen to enforce/ maintain the status quo and the only impediment in its path may be an assertive superior judiciary that has been increasingly finding its feet in recent weeks. If jailed PTI leader and former prime minister Imran Khans article in UKs conservative right-wing Telegraph newspaper blaming the military leadership directly for all his woes the week before was not hint enough of the state of play, two public statements by the latter clarified issues rather unambiguously. The first came in the DG ISPRs press briefing, which was ostensibly called to discuss Afghanistan-based terrorist groups involvement in attacks on Chinese nationals working on development projects in the country. But in response to a couple of questions about the PTI and Imran Khan related to the events of May 9 last year, the DG ISPR stated unequivocally that the only path to rehabilitation for the political party and its leaders was to seek forgiveness for attacking your own forces.
Then, perhaps, talks could happen and that too with political parties (ie, the government), as the military had nothing to do with politics. Imran Khan has been consistent in saying he wouldnt talk to the powerless political parties and that a meaningful dialogue is possible only with the military. The DG ISPR also lamented the delay in the prosecution and sentencing of all those responsible for the May mayhem  including the leaders and mastermind against whom irrefutable evidence has been gathered and submitted  and, in doing so, appeared to hint at the establishments frustrations with what it perceives as roadblocks being erected by the judiciary. The content of the live presser evoked an equally adamant response from the PTI, which went on the offensive, reiterating its stance that May 9 was a false flag operation, accusing the militarys spokesman of being economical with the truth, and saying it would be happy to live with the findings of an impartial judicial commission into the May 9 events and would even apologise if found to be at fault. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. The military spokesman had pre-empted this demand in his briefing earlier by saying if a probe were to happen, as was being demanded, it ought to start with 2014, and not nine years later. The 2014 PTI sit-in in the federal capital was said to have been instigated and backed by the then ISI chief. This was the first indication that the military was prepared to hold its own accountable for past follies, if it paved the way for the trials and sentencing of PTI leaders it says were responsible for the attacks on defence installations in a number of cities in Punjab and KP. While the spokesman left nothing to the imagination, on the first anniversary of May 9, the army chief added his voice to his chief spokesmans in terms of stressing the need for punishing the perpetrators of the violence a year earlier, also lashing out against what he called digital terrorism.
This indicates that harsher curbs on social media are planned. So far, the PTI has had overwhelming social media dominance and had been able to keep a step ahead of its adversaries, but we will find out soon whether it has what it takes to bypass software the Chinese have developed over the years (and Pakistan has reportedly acquired) and successfully used to block dissident content. With this ever-widening gulf between the establishment and the party it once saw as a panacea for all that ails Pakistan, the one thing that many felt could force a rethink in the establishment would have been a public manifestation of the immense support enjoyed by the PTI, as evidenced in last Februarys elections. Many Pakistan watchers keenly waited all day for multitudes of PTI supporters to spill out onto the roads and streets of major urban conurbations on the party leaders call to break the shackles and protest on May 9. But the brutal crackdown of the past one year seems to have knocked the wind out of the partys sails and worn down the workers will. People may turn out to vote for it in droves, but did not appear prepared to risk life, limb and liberty in coming out for mass protests. Some small localised protests did happen, but had zero impact in the sense of influencing decision-making in the corridors of power. Going forward, a couple of factors will play a role in steering developments. The first and foremost will be the confidence the army chief has in his control over his institution. His predecessor appointed a dozen major generals to three stars in his final six weeks in office and left the incumbent little room in terms of forming his own team. Natural attrition and the more dramatic exit of a couple of three stars on disciplinary grounds recently has, 18 months down the line, given the chief an opportunity to place senior officers of his own choosing in key roles which will give him greater freedom of action both inside and outside the institution. The promotion of three officers this week, including the DG ISPR, to three stars was another step in that direction. The military saw May 9 as a coup against the chief, a failed attempt to dislodge him from office. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. With the PTI protests failing to gather momentum, the only impediment in his path seems to be an increasingly assertive superior judiciary. It can and will, in all likelihood, challenge the establishments pre-eminence in decision-making. It isnt clear how the latter plans to deal with that, especially because it believes that a direly needed economic revival is only possible under the umbrella of a hybrid set-up and in a relatively calm political environment. Only the judiciary can rock its boat now. The writer is a former editor of Dawn. abbas.nasir@hotmail.com Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Looming pension crisis cries out for corrective measures
Description : Pension reform is again a hot topic, but this time, bureaucrats will make it appear as if it is intended to benefit top officials. The reforms go beyond just raising the retirement age or taxing pensions. Instead, a series of actions, similar to those that were done in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP), should be seriously considered to reduce the cost of pensions to the government exchequer. The national pension cost will reach nearly Rs2 trillion in FY24, and it is predicted to rise to Rs10tr in the next decade if no reforms are implemented. In 2002-03, the pension cost stood at Rs25 billion, but in a span of just 20 years, it skyrocketed to over Rs1.5tr. Pension reforms have previously been tested in KP and generated the expected cost-saving results. It is high time to rationalise the existing pension programme and transition to more modern schemes available in developing and developed countries. Last week, Finance Minister Muhammad Aurangzeb proposed to raise the retirement age from 60 to 65 years. It has sparked controversy over whether the government intends to benefit only a select few individuals. This decision has both advantages and disadvantages. In KP, the age restriction was raised to 63 years in 2019 with a projected annual savings of Rs20bn. However, the decision was reversed due to strong protest from bureaucrats, and the court also overturned the decision. However, KPs other pension reforms remained in effect. KP Advisor on Finance Muzzammil Aslam has a different take on raising the age restriction than his predecessor, who implemented a series of reforms. Mr Aslam believes that the lump sum payment of pension payments will be delayed for the next five years, providing some breathing room for the time being. This will allow the government to show a lower budget deficit. The net impact will increase when the five-year allowances are added to the basic salary, which will be used to pay the pension. The age extension will postpone payments, but total payouts to employees will climb over the following five years. While these efforts provide some relief in the short term, crucial steps must be implemented to address the increasing pension liabilities. The governments liabilities have jumped from Rs25bn in FY03 to Rs2tr in FY24 There is another idea to tax pensions. It may also face political challenges. However, the KP government has imposed a 5pc pension tax on grades 17 and above on their executive allowance. It is estimated that this measure alone will generate Rs150bn in contributions to a pay-as-you-go pension system. This was not an easy decision, but it was made in KP to obtain some contribution from existing employees. The federal government can look into this step in response to opposition to taxing pensions. KP reforms In 2004, based on recommendations from a World Bank project, the India implemented a national pension scheme wherein employee contributions are matched by the government. Pakistan did not choose to adopt it since it was not anticipated that the cost would rise so dramatically over the next 20 years. Taimur Khan Jhagra, former finance minister of KP, took the lead in implementing a series of pension reforms, including the introduction of a contributory pension scheme for new employees beginning July 1, 2022. Few substantial changes were made to the existing pension programme. A well-known 13-tier pension system was in place, covering the pensioners widow, children, parents, siblings, sisters, and grandchildren. KP confined it to direct dependents. The federal government did the same last year, but other provinces have not followed suit. The previous PTI government raised KP and Punjabs minimum retirement age to 55 from 45, reducing KPs pension bill by Rs20bn alone. KP consolidated various pensions into a single one. Previously, individuals could receive two pensions simultaneously, with an active employee receiving both a salary and a pension. The major reform is the implementation of a contributing pension scheme for new employees. Under this programme, the KP government contributes 12pc and employees contribute 10pc. So far, 40,000 staff have been hired under this system starting July 1, 2022. There are additional critical reforms that the KP and federal governments should implement, such as revisiting the single Universal Pay Scale between Grades 1 and 22. Pay in provinces is decoupled from the Centre and between departments, allowing each department to develop a pay scale appropriate for their budget and the market value of their professions. Pension reforms are greatly needed. The question is whether the state will be able to sustain pension payments for the next 10 to 15 years. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : SMOKERS CORNER: KHAN AND THE GENERALS
Description : In May 2023, a recorded phone call  allegedly between the mother-in-law of the former Chief Justice of Pakistan (CJP) Umar Atta Bandial, and the wife of a lawyer-member of Imran Khans populist Pakistan Tehreek-i-Insaf (PTI)  was leaked on social media. In the call, the two ladies can be heard criticising the coalition government made up of the parties that had ousted Khans regime in April 2022 through an act of parliament. At one point in the leaked conversation, the mother-in-law laments, Yeh kambakht martial law bhi tau nahin lagaatay! [These cursed people dont even impose martial law!] Bykambakht,she meant the military establishment (ME). The conversation was surreal on many levels. Khan had been the blue-eyed boy of the ME, until he had a falling out with his makers. From 2011 till he was elected as prime minister in 2018, the ME had successfully shaped Khans political rise in a highly coordinated manner. His popularity was first established within the rank and file of the military. Then, some TV journalists were brought on board, followed by the induction of some vital members of the judiciary.
This troika  the ME, the electronic media and the judiciary  was complimented by the trained social media wing of Khans PTI to proliferate narratives pitched against the two older mainstream parties, the Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) and the Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP). The two were deeply demonised as being corrupt. After his ouster, Imran Khan was convinced that the establishment had betrayed him, and the May 9-10 protests last year were an attempt to rally support amongst pro-Khan factions in the military. However, any military intervention was drastically overestimated by his supporters A constituency that had initially been built by the former military dictator Gen Pervez Musharraf, and which mostly consisted of middle-class and upper-middle-class Pakistanis, was navigated by the ME and the media in such a manner that it eventually fell in Khans lap. This became a quadrilateral elite, comprising the ME, the media, the judiciary and the middle classes. After Khans ouster in April 2022, he began to publicly lambast the ME, accusing it of betraying him. But the truth is, due to the many abject failures of Khans government, the ME had begun to gradually distance itself from him months before he was ousted. In February 2022, Bandial became the CJP. He was cut from the same cloth that at least four of his predecessors were. These included Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry and, even more so, Justice Saqib Nasir, Justice Asif Khosa and Justice Gulzar Ahmad. Anti-PTI parties often accused them of being overtly pro-Khan. Justice Bandial was accused of having a soft corner for Khan. Truth is, Bandial wasnt very good at hiding this soft corner. Now the question is, during the time of the aforementioned phone call leak, when Khan was holding angry rallies and condemning the ME, why was Bandials mother-in-law yearning for a military takeover? Equally surreal was the presence of banners in some pro-Khan rallies with We Want Martial Law written on them. Also, why did the PTI  by planning last years violent riots on May 9 and 10, in which PTI supporters and members attacked military property  believe that this would cause a split in the armed forces and bring pro-Khan generals to power? Many academics who study coups are of the view that, if the conditions allow, street protests can be followed by a coup detat. According to the political scientist Scott A Tyson, protests are often a signal to the elites to intervene.
The elites in this context are the military and political elites. These may also include the higher judiciary and business elites. A regime facing the protests, too, is made up of political elites. Once the anti-regime elites decide that the protests are clearly signalling for an intervention, this is then communicated to the state elites. The media too plays a role in this. Its reporting of the protests may strengthen the signal and galvanise the military to intervene. The mother-in-laws kambakht lament was expressing a desperate yearning within sections of economic elites for military intervention. This nature of signalling was loud and clear on numerous WhatsApp groups when Khan was holding rallies against his ouster. The signal became even more obvious when the We Want Martial Law banners began to appear at the rallies. Some media personnel also started enhancing the signal to the ME. But by late 2022, the MEs top leadership had changed. A general who had earlier exited the project that was set up to facilitate Khans rise became the new army chief. Yet, PTI believed that many remnants of the project were still active within the military. I believe that with the judiciary still in facilitation mode, the notion of causing a split within the military to replace the new military chief with pro-Khan generals was the brainwave of some retired military men who were well-versed in the theories of post-protest coups. Once the signal to intervene in Khans post-ouster rallies was ignored by the new ME, a violent uprising was conceived that was to target the new ME. The uprising was enacted to evoke the concerns of the supposed pro-Khan generals. The signal now was: eject the new army chief and intervene (on the side of Khan) to avoid an all-out civil war. This plan could not have been formulated without the input of some retired officers. Many of them had been quite vocal in their support for Khan.
The violent May 9 and 10 protests were orchestrated by a political elite (PTI) against another set of elites (the coalition government) to signal the need for an intervention to judicial and military elites. But, according to Tyson, whether or not a coup will succeed is generally not certain to elites. This uncertainty is caused by the uncertainty regarding the actions of other elites. The other elite, in the context of the May 9 and 10 riots, was the military. An intervention by pro-Khan officers was drastically overestimated by the planners and the plan collapsed. The coalition government was able to withstand the assault. The new military chief began to swiftly oust the remaining pro-Khan elements from the military  even though those remaining in the judiciary are now trying to avoid suffering a similar fate through a pushback in the name of the independence of the judiciary.This, too, is quite surreal. Published in Dawn, EOS, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : A turbulent 2023
Description : PAKISTAN faced a tumultuous year in 2023 marked by severe economic distress and a sharp erosion of civil liberties. As documented in the HRCPs annual report, the year was nothing short of a human rights crisis on multiple fronts. Economic hardship was pervasive, with back-breaking inflation  nearly 40pc  and low growth hitting the common citizen the hardest. Protests were widespread, ranging from government employees striking against delayed salaries and pension issues to political demonstrations demanding timely elections. The state responded with indifference and sometimes outright violence, underlining its disregard for the peoples constitutional rights. The political arena was no less strained: the year saw unprecedented violence following the arrest of former prime minister Imran Khan; subsequent PTI-led riots were met with harsh government crackdowns. This included mass arrests and the controversial use of military courts for civilian trials. Political dissent was stifled and freedom of speech curtailed with internet shutdowns and media gags on reporting of certain political leaders. Sadly, the governments management of the turmoil involved significant overreach, impacting judicial independence and skewing the electoral landscape. The swift passage of laws granting sweeping powers to intelligence agencies and restricting media freedoms points to the governments alarming propensity to consolidate power at the cost of transparency and accountability.
Human rights violations were not limited to political suppression. The report highlights severe abuses such as enforced disappearances, alleged extrajudicial killings and custodial torture by state agencies. The societal impact of these policies and actions has been devastating. Moreover, marginalised communities, including women, children, religious minorities, and transgender persons, faced increased violence and discrimination. Notable too was the harsh crackdown on peaceful assemblies like the Baloch Yakjehti Councils protests. On the international front, despite engaging with global human rights mechanisms, Pakistans selective adherence to recommendations concerning enforced disappearances and the use of the death penalty reflected a reluctance to fully align with international human rights standards. Rulers would do well to remember that adhering to those standards will help maintain Pakistans desperately needed GSP-Plus status and be a more inviting place for foreign investment.
As the year proceeds, it is imperative for the state to reconsider its approach to human rights. The government must ensure the independence of the judiciary, respect for democratic processes, and protection for all citizens against the abuse of power. Laws that infringe on freedom of expression and assembly should be reviewed and reformed. Additionally, there should be a concerted effort to address the economic inequalities that underpin much of the social unrest. For a stable and prosperous Pakistan, human rights must be more than an ideal; they must be an integral part of governance and everyday life. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Love knows no boundaries at Karachis Edhi Home nursery for special children
Description : KARACHI: Its one day to Mothers Day and the childrens nursery at the Edhi Home in Mithadar is decorated with balloons and posters along with framed photographs of the late couple Abdul Sattar Edhi and Bilquis Edhi. Children in the classrooms are busy making greeting cards, drawing pictures of themselves and the only woman whom they have come to know as their mother, their Chhoti (younger) Mummy Sabah Faisal Edhi. The duties of the busy mother of so many children, including four of her own, starts from early morning. After tending to her own household duties and sending off her youngest, Moosa Edhi, to school, she is in the nursery at 8am sharp, inquiring from the staff there if everyone had a good sleep, if anyone had any issues during the night. It has become a habit with her to visit the nursery first to inquire about her babies before getting to her other work of calling up the other Edhi Homes and Centres, asking about the other children, their health and school progress, asking about the women in their Homes, tending to the marriage proposals, and adoption procedures and planning outings and picnics for the children. When parents discover their babies are not well, they quietly leave them in our cot, says Sabah Edhi as country celebrates Mothers Day today But today, before she can go inside the nursery, she stops in the playroom to admire three-year-old Fatimas greeting her with a broad smile and a happy dance. Chhoti Mummy hugs the child and gestures to know if she has eaten breakfast. Fatima is deaf and mute. She has only recently been fitted with a cochlear implant, which has enabled her to hear and appreciate music to which she loves to dance. It is quite obvious that Sabahs favourite in the nursery is five-year-old Moosa, named by Mummy, Bilquis Edhi, herself, after her own youngest grandson, Sabah and Faisals youngest son Moosa. But this Moosa, even though he is five, doesnt look more than a year old. His growth is stunted. Sabah lifts him out of his cot and cuddles him lovingly. The nursery only has special children or children with learning disabilities. Moosa was the last child here named by Bilquis Edhi. The rest have been given names by their Chhoti Mummy. There are two newborn baby girls, Aimen and Noor Fatima, peacefully sleeping in their cradles in the cheerful blue nursery. Both the babies are blind. The moment some parents discover that all is not well with their babies they quietly leave them in our cot, says Sabah. They never return for them, she sighs. Parents of very sick children, too, disown them even when they know that their child doesnt have much time to live. We take them in, find them the best of medical care till the last of their breath, she adds. On discovering a child in the cot, we first try to get information about who left him or her there followed by a thorough medical check-up. If they are in need of medical care, we make sure that they receive the best that there is. Just the other day, someone left a little girl suffering from diarrhoea. She had to be hospitalised, she informs. Just then one little girl, of about four years of age, who also looks like she is considerably attached to her Chhoti Mummy walks in and runs up to her. She is normal. There is nothing wrong with this one, Sabah says. She says her name is Manahil. We found her near Sohrab Goth. Most of the children in our Sohrab Goth Centre are much older so I brought her here with me until we can find her parents, she informs. By the grace of God, there is no shortage of space, love and care in this Home built for these children by Edhi Sahab and Mummy, she says, kissing the childs head. All children are a blessing, a priceless gift from God. I wish the parents who discard their children like or neglect them would realise this. I wish such parents could love their special, disabled or sick children like they love their normal children, she says. Sometimes, these very children who they love so much because they are normal and healthy grow up to discard their parents when they are old and weak. Thats the story of so many old people in our homes, she concludes. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Documentary on Dr Aafia Siddiqui launched in Karachi
Description : KARACHI: Aafia Siddiqui  The True Story, a documentary by Friends of Aafia, was launched here at the Karachi Press Club (KPC) on Saturday. The documentary shed light on various aspects of the life of Dr Aafia from her birth, education, marriage and to her kidnapping in Karachi and confinement in a notorious US prison.
View this post on Instagram
Aafias sister Dr Fowzia Siddiqui and Muslim Matters Editor-in-chief Hena Zuberi and others spoke at the event. Dr Fowzia said that her sister Dr Aafia was a gifted child, a bright scholar and a loving and caring person. She got a PhD degree in neurosciences from Brandies University of the US and it was her dream to revolutionise education system in Pakistan. In the documentary, human rights lawyer Clive Stafford Smith, who currently represents Dr Aafia, said a vast majority of the American people had no idea who Dr Aafia was and they also did not care.
He said that she has suffered a lot in the US prison and braved all sorts of torture. El-Hajj Mauri Saalakhan, the founding president and director of operations at The Aafia Foundation, told the documentary makers that after 9/11, the US targeted the human rights and liberties of people, especially Muslims. He said Dr Aafia also fell prey to this victimisation and in 2003 she was kidnapped, along with her children, in Karachi and got disappeared on mere suspicion that her husband had bought online night vision goggles. Umme Muhammad, the president of the Musawemem Campaign, said for the last 15 years she had been linked to the case of Dr Aafia but disappointingly nothing more could be achieved.
She said Dr Aafia was targeted only because she was Muslim. Yvonne Ridley was amongst the first investigative journalists who told the world that Dr Aafia was jailed in Afghanistan. Talking about the grey lady prisoner of Bigram jail, she said in those times the US administration would dehumanise the prisoners and the same was done to Dr Aafia. She was wounded by the US soldiers and in injured condition she was brought to the US and tried by a court in a highly biased manner and jailed for long 86 years, which means the rest of her life. Zeina El-Debis, leader of the Friends of Aafia and founder of the Shade of Mercy Foundation, talked about their efforts to get Dr Aafia repatriated on humanitarian grounds. She said the documentary was also a part of such efforts. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Situationer: Riverine region in the crosshairs of militia violence
Description : DESPITE a year-long anti-dacoit operation in upper Sindhs riverine area, the dacoit factor remains an enigma for the provincial police. The situation took a new turn on May 5 when the Bugtis, allegedly backed by the Punjab police and equipped with military-grade weapons, infiltrated the riverine area of Rwanti in Ghotki, which lies on the Sindh-Punjab border, adding a new layer of complexity to the ongoing operation. The recent incident has once again laid bare the seeming helplessness of the Sindh police, sparking outrage among the provinces intelligentsia. The scourge of dacoits has long plagued parts of northern Sindh, with the governments efforts to eradicate them yielding little success. Despite continued endeavours to tackle the issue, the desired results remain elusive. The Kalpar Bugtis, led by their chief Jalal Kalpar Bugti, claimed to have exacted revenge for the murder of his 30-year-old son, Abdul Rehman Kalpar, by killing two prominent dacoits from the Shar community and injuring half a dozen others. The incident occurred in the Machhko police station area, which falls under the jurisdiction of the Punjab police. The dacoits killed were identified as Alim alias Almo Shar, brother of Sanu Shar, and Hakim alias Haku Shar. Rehman Kalpar was ambushed and killed by dacoits on Feb 13 while he was travelling on the CPEC road in Ghotki district. Jalal Kalpar reached out to the Sindh police, seeking their assistance in avenging his sons murder, according to a senior police officer familiar with the situation. Dacoit issue remains an enigma for Sindh police Jalal Kalpar is unapologetic and straightforward in justifying his actions. I repeatedly reached out to the Ghotki police, but they ignored me. I went to perform Umrah, and upon my return, I was approached by the Punjab police to liaise with them and see how things work, he told Dawn over phone from Sui in Balochistan.
Jalal alleged that Ghotki police SSP Anwar Khetran made excuses, claiming that his force was outgunned by the dacoits, as they only had G-3 and Kalashnikov rifles. However, he added, Mr Khetran did acknowledge that geo-fencing evidence had confirmed the involvement of the Shar community in his sons murder. Punjab police sought help from me in terms of human resource and police would lead the offensive. My men were there as a cover. Finally, Shars were killed in Machko police limits of Punjab. Sindh police didnt do anything in this offence, Jalal alleged. Jalal Kalpar hails from those Bugti families who defied the late Nawab Akbar Bugti and were subsequently displaced from Dera Bugti, settling in Sindh. Following Rehmans killing, Jalal declared at a jirga in Sui that he would hold accountable those responsible, specifically targeting Shaharyar Shar, the chieftain of the Shar clan and a former PTI leader who later joined PPP. In an attempt to defuse the situation, Shar reached out to Jalal to clarify his position and maintain neutrality. Jalal conveyed message to Shaharyar that if Abid Hussain Jatoi, Abid Sundrani, or Gul Mohammad Jakhrani stand surety for him, only then will he talk to him. Only Gul Mohammad agreed, and he, along with Shaharyar, met Kalpar at his Sukkur residence, but names of Rahib Khan Shar and Sana Shar emerged as those responsible for Rehmans murder, a police officer said. Police post as Bugtis base A former SSP of Ghotki said that before the May 5 incident, Bugtis had started arriving in areas along the Sindh-Punjab border. They [Bugtis] wanted Bhaya-4 police post vacated by Sindh police. This post is manned by Ghotki police, but the area falls in Punjabs territorial limits. As they wanted to use this post as their operational base, but didnt find Ghotki police forthcoming in their response, so they turned to Punjab police eventually, said the officer. According to him, the Punjab police permitted the Bugtis to utilise the Camp-2 location, which was situated approximately 800 metres from Sanu Shars hideout. Its an ideal location from which they can confront the Shars comfortably, the officer added. Viral video images revealed that the Bugtis, armed with prohibited and military-grade weapons, disembarked from APCs in the katcha area. The ensuing gun battle, which lasted a couple of days, resulted in the deaths of two Shars and injuries to several others. The Bugtis then departed. According to a former SSP of Shikarpur, the military-grade weapons used were of 82mm dimension, a type commonly seen in Afghanistan. Dangerous precedent Professor Inam Shaikh, an analyst, says, The incident has set a dangerous precedent. He urges the Supreme Court to take suo motu notice. How can state collaborate with private persons? It amounts to creating private militia which otherwise means civil war. Supreme Court must step in to take action against police authorities and criminals for this illegal act, he insists. Naseer Memon, a writer, has analysed the situation from the perspective of good dacoits, bad dacoits and the economy of the katcha area. The recent episode of allowing one tribe to attack another in the katcha area can snowball this crime into a tribal warfare. This can flare up a bloodbath, he says. He believes that a multi-stakeholder economy, operating behind the scenes, drives the dacoits, kidnapping, and ransom industry in upper Sindh. A police official reveals that Rahib Shar has been primarily responsible for the kidnapping of people on the CPEC road and other areas. Meanwhile, Sanu Shar has been running a honey trap industry in the riverine area. According to another police officer, Rahib Shar is residing in Sindhs riverine area, while Sanu Shar is based in Punjabs limits. Actually, there is a strip of riverine land stretching over around 3-4km that falls in Sindh but administratively looked after by Rahim Yar Khan administration. Since Punjab police dont pay heed to this area much and Sindh police also remain inactive, it has become a sort of no mans land and a safe haven for outlaws, claims an SSP from lower Sindh. Bugtis aim to target Shars as a community, while the actual culprits, Rahib Shar and Sanu Shar, remain out of their reach. After the July 28, 2023, killing of notorious dacoits Janu Indher, Soomar Shar, Shahzado Dashti, Nazar Mohammad alias Nazroo alias Kato Shar, and Mubashir alias Mushir Indhar, the Sindh police chief was initially reluctant to take a position. However, the Sindh police later claimed credit for the operation. Meanwhile, the Punjab police also staked their claim. Nevertheless, the Sindh police asserted their right to the head money of Rs8.5 million fixed by the government against Janu, Soomar, and Shahzado. After the Bugtis onslaught on the Shars, Sanu Shar uploaded a video clarifying that he was not involved in Rehmans murder. However, this failed to appease Jalal Kalpar, who has temporarily withdrawn from the area but remains resolute in his vow to take on the Shars until Rehmans murderers are killed. I have no issues with Sindh or the Sindhi people, nor did I have any enmity with the Shars as a community. It is the Ganderi Shars, specifically Sannu, Moriyo, Jamal, and Rahib, who are responsible for my sons murder. So, my quest for vengeance is far from over, he declared. Despite repeated messages and calls, Ghotki SSP Sumair Noor Channa remained unavailable to explain whether criminal cases have been lodged in this regard. Similarly, Rahim Yar Khan SSP Rizwan Gondal did not reply to questions about how Punjab police are backing private militias to take on outlaws. A message was also sent to Sindh IG Ghulam Nabi Memon to get his side of the story, but no contact could be established with him. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Pakistans iCube-Qamar beams back first images from moons orbit
Description : Pakistans inaugural lunar satellite iCube-Qamar on Friday transmitted the first-ever images captured by it from the lunar orbit, the national space agency said. The satellite, part of Chinas Change-6 lunar mission, was launched from the Hainan province on May 3 and had successfully entered the moons orbit at 1:14pm on May 8. The moon is at an average distance of 384,400km from earth. The lunar module was designed by Islamabads Institute of Space Technology (IST) in collaboration with Chinas Shanghai University (SJTU) and Pakistans national space agency Suparco. The landmark images were unveiled at a ceremony organised at the China National Space Agency (CNSA) to mark the successful mission accomplishment, IST spokesperson and head of Department of Electrical and Computer Science, Dr Khurram Khursheed told Dawn.com. They were officially handed over to Pakistans ambassador to Beijing, she added.
View this post on Instagram
One of the first-ever images captured by Pakistans inaugural lunar satellite iCube-Qamar shows the moon and the sun.   Suparco/CNSA
The iCube-Q orbiter carries two optical cameras to image the lunar surface. The module is a cube satellite or cubesat  miniature satellites typically characterised by their small size and standardized cubic design. Due to their compact size and relatively low cost compared to traditional satellites, CubeSats offered opportunities for universities, research institutions and commercial entities to participate in space missions and gather valuable data for scientific advancement and innovation. Operating in extreme temperatures as low as minus 100 degrees Celsius, the satellite features a 7-kilogramme one-megapixel camera tailored for missions with power constraints.
Dr Khursheed had said the satellite would play a critical role in deep space missions. Its surface-level analysis capabilities, transmitting images at a modest 1-kbps, will provide crucial data on crater locations, water, and traces of ice on the moons surface, he had said. As the Chinese lander collects rock and soil samples, iCube-Q will spend three to six months orbiting the moon, capturing and transmitting images of the moon back to Earth. The IST said the opportunity to release the cubesat in lunar orbit from the Change-6 mission was offered by the CNSA through the Asia Pacific Space Cooperation Organisation (Apsco). After a thorough evaluation, Pakistans proposal was accepted out of all Apsco member states.
One of the first-ever images captured by Pakistans inaugural lunar satellite iCube-Qamar shows the sun shining brightly.   Suparco/CNSA
The Change-6 mission, which aims to explore the moons dark side, employs lunar research payloads from multiple countries, including Pakistans iCube-Qamar satellite. The mission is named after the mythical Chinese moon goddess. Nasa is banned by US law from any collaboration, direct or indirect, with China. On Change-6, China is carrying payloads from France, Italy, Sweden and Pakistan, while Change-7 will bear payloads from Russia, Switzerland and Thailand when it launches in 2026.
Change-6 aims to collect around 2kg of lunar samples from the far side of the Moon and bring them back to Earth for analysis. Chinese state news agency Xinhua had hailed it as the first endeavour of its kind in the history of human lunar exploration. China will send a robotic spacecraft in the coming days on a round trip to the moons far side in the first of three technically demanding missions that will pave the way for an inaugural Chinese crewed landing and a base on the lunar south pole. The probe is set to land in the immense South Pole-Aitken Basin, one of the largest known impact craters in the solar system. Once there, it will scoop up lunar soil and rocks, and carry out other experiments in the landing zone. With no direct line of sight with the Earth, Change-6 must rely on a recently deployed relay satellite orbiting the moon during its 53-day mission, including a never-before-attempted ascent from the moons hidden side on its return journey home. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Ruling coalition loses 27 reserved seats in Punjab
Description :  Speaker suspends PML-Ns 23, PPPs two, and one member each of PML-Q, IPP
 Decision announced on point of order raised by PTI-backed SIC leader
 In National Assembly, ruling coalition also likely to lose 23 seats ahead of budget session LAHORE / ISLAMABAD: The ruling coalition in Punjab led by PML-N on Friday lost dozens of reserved seats in the provincial assembly when the speaker suspended 24 women and three minority MPAs elected on reserved seats and barred them from joining the house proceedings. Twenty-three of the suspended MPAs belonged to PML-N, two to PPP and one each to PML-Q and IPP. Speaker Malik Mohammad Ahmed Khan took the decision on a point of order raised a day ago by opposition lawmaker Rana Aftab of PTI-backed Sunni Ittehad Council (SIC) during the house proceedings. The opposition member had argued that the Supreme Court had suspended the decision of the Election Commission of Pakistan (ECP) of allocating the reserved seats of SIC to other parties on the plea that the SIC had neither contested elections nor had submitted a list of nominees for the seats reserved for women and minorities. But Speaker Khan ruled that he had sought opinions of the advocate general as well as the provincial law department and would take a decision only on receiving their reports. Soon after the beginning of house proceedings on Friday, the speaker read out the Supreme Court order and gave the ruling that Rana Aftabs point of order was lawful and suspended the 27 members immediately. When Mr Aftab pointed out that the suspended MPAs had unlawfully voted for the resolution condemning May 9 violence, the chair said he should have raised the issue when the resolution had been put to vote a day ago. The women MPAs suspended were Maqsoodan Bibi, Rubina Nazir, Salma Zahid, Kanwal Nauman, Zeba Ghafoor, Saeeda Samreen Taj, Sheharbano, Amna Parveen, Syed Sumera Ahmed, Uzma Butt, Afshan Hussain, Shagufta Faisal, Nasreen Riaz, Sajida Naveed, Farzana Abbas, Mariya Talal, Tasheen Fawad, Abida Bashir, Saeeda Muzaffar, Faiza Monima, Amera Khan, Samiya Ata, Rahat Afza and Rukhsana Shafiq. The minority MPAs were Tariq Masih Gill, Waseem Anjum, and Basroji. National Assembly After the Supreme Courts decision and the Punjab Assembly speakers action, the ruling coalition in the National Assembly is also set to lose nearly two dozen members ahead of the crucial budget session. President Asif Ali Zardari on Friday summoned the National Assembly session on Monday (May 13) and the SIC members are expected to seek a similar ruling from Speaker Ayaz Sadiq. After allocating reserved seats to the parties in the NA in proportion to the general seats won by them in the Feb 8 elections, the Election Commission of Pakistan (ECP) had withheld the notifications on 23 reserved seats  20 for women and three for minorities  due to the dispute on the allocation of the seats after the decision of the PTI-backed independents to join the SIC. Later, the ECP refused to allocate these seats to the SIC and issued notifications distributing these seats to the parties in the ruling coalition headed by the PML-N. The ECP allocated 15 seats reserved for women to the PML-N, four to PPP and one to the JUI-F. It allocated one seat each reserved for the minorities to the PML-N, the PPP and the MQM-P. As a result, PML-N became the largest party in the NA with 123 seats whereas the tallies of PPP and the JUI-F rose to 73 and 11, respectively. The ECP had also issued notifications on the reserved seats for women and minorities in Punjab and the KP assemblies the same day. The PML-N had initially won a total of 75 general seats and was joined by nine independents. With the allocation of 19 reserved seats for women and four reserved seats for minorities, the number reached 107. However, after the March 5 notifications, the PML-N had been allocated 15 out of the remaining 20 reserved seats for women and one out of the three remaining seats reserved for minorities, taking the partys tally to 123 seats. Likewise, PPP had won 54 general seats and was allocated 12 seats reserved for women and two for minorities. After the allocation of four more seats reserved for women and one for minorities on March 5, the number of the PPP lawmakers is now 73, still fewer than the PTI-backed independents who had joined the SIC hoping to get reserved seats. The MQM-Pakistan has 22 members in the National Assembly, while the number of JUI-F lawmakers had gone up to 11 from seven. The SC decision is expected to have no effect in the composition of the Balochistan Assembly as PTI had not won any seat in the province in the Feb 8 polls. However, in the provincial assembly of Sindh, the two reserved seats for women were given to PPP from the share of the PTI-SIC, which had nine members. KP Assembly The most interesting distribution of reserved seats had been observed in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Assembly, where the PTI-backed independents had won 91 seats compared to just 19 seats secured by all other political parties combined. However, the JUI-F, which could get only seven general seats to stay on top among these political parties, was allocated 10 reserved seats for women. Likewise, the PML-N, which won six general seats, was given eight reserved seats. The PPP, which bagged four general seats, was allocated six reserved seats. The ANP and the PTI-P, which clinched one general seat each, also remained lucky to have their numbers double in the provincial assembly. However, these MPAs in KP Assembly have not yet taken oath as the speaker has refused to call the session. Gwadar killings Meanwhile, the Punjab Assembly during its Fridays sitting adopted a resolution condemning the recent killing of 11 workers belonging to Punjab in Gwadar. The resolution presented by treasury members Amjad Ali Javed demanded the federal government arrest the culprits. It also demanded that the centre announce a compensation package for the heirs of the deceased. South Punjab On a point of order raised by opposition MPA Nadeem Qureshi, Punjab Finance Minister Mujtaba Shuja told the house that the south Punjab secretariat was not being wrapped up; rather the officers who had been promoted were being replaced by new appointments. The minister also rejected the stance that the PML-N was against the development of south Punjab and said that the region had been developed the most when incumbent Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif was the chief minister of Punjab. Published in Dawn, May 11th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Pakistan remain unbeaten in Azlan Shah Cup as match with New Zealand ends in tie
Description : Pakistan on Friday secured a tie in their match against New Zealand in the 30th Azlan Shah Hockey Cup. Pakistans fifth match today, which was played in Malaysias Ipoh city at 1pm (PKT), saw them remain unbeaten throughout the tournament. The match ended in a draw, with both teams securing one point each, the Pakistan Hockey Federation (PHF) said.
View this post on Instagram
Senior player Ammad Shakeel is leading the 18-member squad with Abu Bakr as the vice-captain. Japan lead the points table with 13 points while Pakistan rank second with 11 points. New Zealand hold the third position with seven points while Malaysia follow them with a point less.
View this post on Instagram
According to the PHF, both Pakistan and New Zealand had not scored by half-time. New Zealand then succeeded in scoring a field goal in the 35th minute of the game. However, Abu Bakr amassed a goal for Pakistan in the 43rd minute while playing at the penalty corner. Pakistan and Japan had already qualified for the final match, which will take place at 5:30pm (PKT) on Saturday at the Azlan Shah Stadium in Ipoh, after winning their respective matches on Wednesday. Pakistan had defeated Canada 5-4 while Japan beat hosts Malaysia 2-1. According to Radio Pakistan, Pakistan have won their three matches against Malaysia, South Korea and Canada while the ones against Japan and New Zealand ended in a draw. Meanwhile, after their 3-1 victory against Canada today, Japan have four wins plus a draw. Earlier this month, head coach Roelant Oltmans had said he expected an improved show by Pakistan in the tournament. Oltmans, 69, has served Pakistans senior and junior teams in different roles since 2004 and was involved with the youth side in his most recent stint. Pakistan won the Azlan Shah Cup title thrice  in 1999, 2000 and 2003  and came third in the last edition which was also held in Ipoh in 2022. Malaysia are the defending champions of this years edition. Addressing the squad via video link, Information Minister Attaullah Tarar reiterated the governments commitment to hockey while also mentioning a campaign across all forms of media to highlight the teams achievements in the Azlan Shah Cup, according to a report from state-run Radio Pakistan. He added that the prime minister would focus on removing obstacles in the development of hockey in Pakistan. Tara said final would be broadcast nationwide tomorrow on Saturday and wished the team luck. The entire nation is praying for the victory of Pakistan and is looking forward to welcome a champion team. Rana Mashood Ahmed, chairman of the Prime Ministers Youth Programme, also congratulated the team for reaching the final after thirteen years. He added that Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif would also host the team on its return and address issues impeding hockeys development in the country. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Who can rock the hybrid boat?
Description : A NUMBER of developments over the past week suggest that the establishment is keen to enforce/ maintain the status quo and the only impediment in its path may be an assertive superior judiciary that has been increasingly finding its feet in recent weeks. If jailed PTI leader and former prime minister Imran Khans article in UKs conservative right-wing Telegraph newspaper blaming the military leadership directly for all his woes the week before was not hint enough of the state of play, two public statements by the latter clarified issues rather unambiguously. The first came in the DG ISPRs press briefing, which was ostensibly called to discuss Afghanistan-based terrorist groups involvement in attacks on Chinese nationals working on development projects in the country. But in response to a couple of questions about the PTI and Imran Khan related to the events of May 9 last year, the DG ISPR stated unequivocally that the only path to rehabilitation for the political party and its leaders was to seek forgiveness for attacking your own forces.
Then, perhaps, talks could happen and that too with political parties (ie, the government), as the military had nothing to do with politics. Imran Khan has been consistent in saying he wouldnt talk to the powerless political parties and that a meaningful dialogue is possible only with the military. The DG ISPR also lamented the delay in the prosecution and sentencing of all those responsible for the May mayhem  including the leaders and mastermind against whom irrefutable evidence has been gathered and submitted  and, in doing so, appeared to hint at the establishments frustrations with what it perceives as roadblocks being erected by the judiciary. The content of the live presser evoked an equally adamant response from the PTI, which went on the offensive, reiterating its stance that May 9 was a false flag operation, accusing the militarys spokesman of being economical with the truth, and saying it would be happy to live with the findings of an impartial judicial commission into the May 9 events and would even apologise if found to be at fault. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. The military spokesman had pre-empted this demand in his briefing earlier by saying if a probe were to happen, as was being demanded, it ought to start with 2014, and not nine years later. The 2014 PTI sit-in in the federal capital was said to have been instigated and backed by the then ISI chief. This was the first indication that the military was prepared to hold its own accountable for past follies, if it paved the way for the trials and sentencing of PTI leaders it says were responsible for the attacks on defence installations in a number of cities in Punjab and KP. While the spokesman left nothing to the imagination, on the first anniversary of May 9, the army chief added his voice to his chief spokesmans in terms of stressing the need for punishing the perpetrators of the violence a year earlier, also lashing out against what he called digital terrorism.
This indicates that harsher curbs on social media are planned. So far, the PTI has had overwhelming social media dominance and had been able to keep a step ahead of its adversaries, but we will find out soon whether it has what it takes to bypass software the Chinese have developed over the years (and Pakistan has reportedly acquired) and successfully used to block dissident content. With this ever-widening gulf between the establishment and the party it once saw as a panacea for all that ails Pakistan, the one thing that many felt could force a rethink in the establishment would have been a public manifestation of the immense support enjoyed by the PTI, as evidenced in last Februarys elections. Many Pakistan watchers keenly waited all day for multitudes of PTI supporters to spill out onto the roads and streets of major urban conurbations on the party leaders call to break the shackles and protest on May 9. But the brutal crackdown of the past one year seems to have knocked the wind out of the partys sails and worn down the workers will. People may turn out to vote for it in droves, but did not appear prepared to risk life, limb and liberty in coming out for mass protests. Some small localised protests did happen, but had zero impact in the sense of influencing decision-making in the corridors of power. Going forward, a couple of factors will play a role in steering developments. The first and foremost will be the confidence the army chief has in his control over his institution. His predecessor appointed a dozen major generals to three stars in his final six weeks in office and left the incumbent little room in terms of forming his own team. Natural attrition and the more dramatic exit of a couple of three stars on disciplinary grounds recently has, 18 months down the line, given the chief an opportunity to place senior officers of his own choosing in key roles which will give him greater freedom of action both inside and outside the institution. The promotion of three officers this week, including the DG ISPR, to three stars was another step in that direction. The military saw May 9 as a coup against the chief, a failed attempt to dislodge him from office. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. With the PTI protests failing to gather momentum, the only impediment in his path seems to be an increasingly assertive superior judiciary. It can and will, in all likelihood, challenge the establishments pre-eminence in decision-making. It isnt clear how the latter plans to deal with that, especially because it believes that a direly needed economic revival is only possible under the umbrella of a hybrid set-up and in a relatively calm political environment. Only the judiciary can rock its boat now. The writer is a former editor of Dawn. abbas.nasir@hotmail.com Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Insurgency and social change
Description : THE recent killing of seven barbershop workers from Punjab in Gwadar is another indicator that the insurgency in Balochistan is evolving and intensifying demographic changes, which will impact the sociopolitical landscape of the province. Although targeted killings of settlers in Balochistan are not a new trend, the emergence of the Balochistan Liberation Army as the primary insurgent group has significantly increased operational capacities and diversified targets.
While the BLA has not officially claimed responsibility for the Gwadar attack, it is likely the act of one of its wings or affiliate groups. Last month, the group carried out a significant attack, killing nine people from central Punjab who were planning on reaching Europe through Iran. Based on their ethnicity, BLA gunmen abducted them from a bus bound for Taftan and later dumped their bodies under a bridge in a hilly area of Noshki. In a similar attack, possibly by the same gunmen, two people were killed when they tried to escape the assailants cordon on N-40, the Quetta-Noshki highway. Following the Noshki attack, the BLA issued a statement claiming that its special squad had killed agents of Pakistans intelligence agencies who, they claimed, were travelling in plain clothes on the bus. However, media reports and investigations later revealed that the victims were using the Balochistan route to travel to Iran and onward to Europe. Baloch militants view workers and travellers from Punjab as collaborators or agents of security forces or the federal government. Attacks targeting Punjabi workers and settlers have occurred in various parts of the province in the past. It appears that the insurgents kill settlers because they are non-combatants and, as such, easy targets. Militant groups assign such tasks to their new recruits to test their conviction and draw them into the cycle of violence. While one can comprehend Baloch grievances against the state institutions and Punjab, it is also crucial to understand why they target non-combatants who have been serving them for years. Whenever anger flares against the states flawed policies, settlers become the targets. Traditionally, Baloch society has a few key professions. Hairdressing is one of the major ones they miss. Teaching comes next, with teachers from Punjab and the Urdu-speaking community making significant contributions to the education sector in the province. Like tribal codes in other parts of the country, the Baloch follow the tradition of hosting members of different ethnicities without integrating them into their tribal ethics. This is a common practice, as assimilation is a long process. The same applies to settlers from Punjab and urban Sindh, who have embraced the norms of Baloch society, while maintaining ties with their native towns and communities.
However, Punjabis constitute the largest ethnic group in the country and wield significant power and resources, leading to resentment not only among the Baloch, but also Pakhtuns and Sindhis. Whenever anger flares against the establishment and the states flawed policies, settlers become the targets of this animosity. Historically, barbers have been the first victims when such hatred triggers violence. It is worth noting that many of these barbers hail from southern Punjab, much of which identifies itself as Baloch, but their official domicile determines their identity and ethnicity. Over the last two decades, Pakhtuns have captured market businesses in urban Balochistan, while Sindhis have gradually become prominent in the labour market. Despite issues of ethnic and tribal pride and sociocultural differences, there has been no hostility towards these communities. This is because both ethnicities are part of Balochistan and share some cultural commonalities. Moreover, both communities have faced major hostility, apart from minor issues related to ethnic and tribal pride and sociocultural differences. The reasons are that both ethnicities are part of Balochistan and share few other cultural commonalities, but both are also seen as deprived communities and, in the past, have remained part of the political struggle for rights. Insurgencies have no room for neutrality or ambiguity, as insurgents seek clear distinctions between friends and foes. In places like Myanmar and India, ethnic insurgents target civilians from minority ethnic groups, as well as engage in property destruction and other abuses. While small ethnic groups may strive to maintain a neutral stance, they often find themselves between insurgents and counterinsurgents in grey areas. This dynamic is evident among Pakhtuns and Sindhis, who have been targeted by insurgents while working on government projects. The contractors had hired them as an alternative to Punjabi labour, but they were not spared despite a sense of affinity with them.
Sociopolitical transformation is a complex phenomenon, which is influenced not only by insurgents but also by internal societal changes. Baloch society is transforming due to rural-to-urban migration, increasing literacy rates, and improved connectivity. Similar to Karachis experience, urbanisation in Quetta is making other major urban centres multi-ethnic too. Despite ethnic bonds with Sindhis, coexistence with Pakhtuns and Sindhis may face occasional challenges. Additionally, religion presents a growing challenge, as religious fervour increases alongside literacy rates among the Baloch. While this may appear advantageous for state institutions seeking cohesion through religion, religiosity has not weakened Balochistans nationalistic sentiments. The promotion of religious organisations and madressahs by state institutions has failed to make a significant impact, mainly due to the vast disparities within Baloch societys tribal, rural, and urban composition, which foster diverse political interests. The very forces undermining peace are now major power players. At the national level, the provinces poor human development and governance indicators leave ample space for resistance politics. Sociopolitical changes often trigger paradoxical sentiments, with simultaneous pro-development and anti-development attitudes emerging. When the sense of deprivation intensifies, and resource distribution becomes contentious, it creates a conducive environment for militants to recruit, expand, and diversify their targets and tactics. Targeting non-combatants of the majority group reflects a deepening societal anger at this level. This is the most crucial level, as the state has to rethink and correct its approach towards Balochistan. The writer is a security analyst. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Indian elections
Description : THE Islamophobic rhetoric being employed by Narendra Modi for this election campaign has become shrill. Pakistan has nearly always been an electoral issue in India. However, this time, it is Indian Muslims who are bearing the brunt of the Indian prime ministers hate speech. Speaking in Rajasthan last month, he called Muslims infiltrators and said they produce too many children. In Gujarat, where, as chief minister, he had overseen the massacre of Muslims in 2002, he accused the Congress of seeking to loot Indias wealth and redistribute it among Muslims, and of organising a vote jihad against his leadership. Later, he accused the Congress and Muslims of stealing Hindu wealth and property.
Modis inflammatory rhetoric was followed by the BJPs campaign video portraying Muslims as outsiders who plundered Indias wealth. As concerns grew about communal violence, the video was removed. These allegations are a sequel to Modis public referencing of earlier conspiracy theories of love jihad (Muslims forcibly converting Hindu women and marrying them to increase the Muslim population) or land jihad (capturing land to construct religious structures and gaining control of Indias territory). Concerns that his rhetoric might incite further violence against Indian Muslims are increasing. Ordinarily, since Hindus are in a majority in India, it may be difficult to question the rationale of creating a Hindu state. However, two observations are in order. One, the expansionist designs of the cherished Hindu state seek the creation of an Akhand Bharat, a Hindu right fantasy, which would violate the territorial integrity of Nepal, Bangladesh, Pakistan, and Afghanistan, as per a map displayed in the new parliament building. This is not acceptable to the aforementioned independent states. Two, though the creation of a Hindu state should not translate into discrimination against minorities, regrettably this will be the case. The works of French political scientist Christophe Jaffrelot illustrate how Muslims, 14.5 per cent of Indias population, are grossly underrepresented in bureaucracy, the judiciary, police, and legislative organs. They are second-class citizens.
The Muslim-majority area of Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmiri is also being subjected to demographic engineering. The destruction of the centuries-old Babri Masjid by Hindu zealots in 1992 and the construction of a temple in its place has set a precedent that might be followed for other historic mosques. This contrasts sharply with the UAEs gesture of permitting a Hindu temple in Abu Dhabi. Modis anti-Muslim rhetoric is raising concerns of violence. Analysts are also pointing out the fascist tendencies of the BJP regime, a steep decline in democratic values, and a departure from the moorings of pluralism and secularism on which modern India was founded. In her book The Incarcerations, Alpa Shah contends that Modis India is using its national security apparatus to incarcerate ordinary citizens for their dissenting views. Commenting on the book, Arundhati Roy stated that this was about criminalisation and incarceration of dissent itself. Strikingly, the Modi regime has also used art and culture to project the Hindutva philosophy. Kunal Purohits book H-Pop: The Secretive World of Hindutva Pop Stars shows how Hindutva pop stars and influencers are being used to spread the message of Hindu supremacy and create acceptance of Hindutvas core beliefs. Apart from this, Modi is playing on his governments accomplishments: making India the worlds fifth largest economy; the construction of 50,000 kilometres of national highways; boosting Indias military spending; building Vikrant, Indias first domestically built aircraft carrier; and the Chandrayaan-3 moon landing. His prospects of winning a third term have been bolstered by a weak opposition. Despite the formation of the Congress-led 37-party INDIA coalition, there is no real challenge. What has bolstered his outreach is Indias enhanced global standing. In his book Why Bharat Matters, S. Jaishankar presents India as a leader of the global south and makes a case for the rejuvenation of India as a civilisational state.
There are some lessons that Pakistan could learn from Indias electoral process. One, despite the large scale of Indias elections (969 million registered voters; 1m polling stations) and the use of electronic voting machines, election results are largely accepted without much ado. Two, there is no caretaker government, as the incumbents become caretakers in a way, and refrain from announcing major policy decisions or sanctioning expenditure for development schemes. If Modi wins a third term, he is likely to maintain his pro-Hindutva, anti-Muslim, and hegemonic attitude towards regional countries, particularly Pakistan. The write is a former foreign secretary and chairman of Sanober Institute Islamabad. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : A turbulent 2023
Description : PAKISTAN faced a tumultuous year in 2023 marked by severe economic distress and a sharp erosion of civil liberties. As documented in the HRCPs annual report, the year was nothing short of a human rights crisis on multiple fronts. Economic hardship was pervasive, with back-breaking inflation  nearly 40pc  and low growth hitting the common citizen the hardest. Protests were widespread, ranging from government employees striking against delayed salaries and pension issues to political demonstrations demanding timely elections. The state responded with indifference and sometimes outright violence, underlining its disregard for the peoples constitutional rights. The political arena was no less strained: the year saw unprecedented violence following the arrest of former prime minister Imran Khan; subsequent PTI-led riots were met with harsh government crackdowns. This included mass arrests and the controversial use of military courts for civilian trials. Political dissent was stifled and freedom of speech curtailed with internet shutdowns and media gags on reporting of certain political leaders. Sadly, the governments management of the turmoil involved significant overreach, impacting judicial independence and skewing the electoral landscape. The swift passage of laws granting sweeping powers to intelligence agencies and restricting media freedoms points to the governments alarming propensity to consolidate power at the cost of transparency and accountability.
Human rights violations were not limited to political suppression. The report highlights severe abuses such as enforced disappearances, alleged extrajudicial killings and custodial torture by state agencies. The societal impact of these policies and actions has been devastating. Moreover, marginalised communities, including women, children, religious minorities, and transgender persons, faced increased violence and discrimination. Notable too was the harsh crackdown on peaceful assemblies like the Baloch Yakjehti Councils protests. On the international front, despite engaging with global human rights mechanisms, Pakistans selective adherence to recommendations concerning enforced disappearances and the use of the death penalty reflected a reluctance to fully align with international human rights standards. Rulers would do well to remember that adhering to those standards will help maintain Pakistans desperately needed GSP-Plus status and be a more inviting place for foreign investment.
As the year proceeds, it is imperative for the state to reconsider its approach to human rights. The government must ensure the independence of the judiciary, respect for democratic processes, and protection for all citizens against the abuse of power. Laws that infringe on freedom of expression and assembly should be reviewed and reformed. Additionally, there should be a concerted effort to address the economic inequalities that underpin much of the social unrest. For a stable and prosperous Pakistan, human rights must be more than an ideal; they must be an integral part of governance and everyday life. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Hope after defeat
Description : ON Saturday, having fallen behind Japan in the first quarter of the Sultan Azlan Shah Cup final, Pakistan showed powers of recovery to take the lead. But Japan levelled matters and then Pakistan could not hold their nerve in the penalty shootout, losing 4-1 after the match had ended 2-2 in regulation time. Head coach Roeltant Oltmans had said on the eve of the match that it would be a good experience for his youthful side if the final went to a shootout. The hope is that these young men, who have rekindled hopes of hockeys revival in Pakistan, will learn from this and return stronger. Pakistan had reached the final of the Azlan Shah Cup for the first time in 13 years after being unbeaten in the round-robin stage. On their way, Pakistan held New Zealand to a draw. Overall, the teams performance can be a starting point to build upon. Ahead of the final, Oltmans had spoken about the potential of this current lot, whilst also slamming critics in a pointed message to the countrys former Olympians, who have been resentful of a foreign coach being at the helm of the national team. The Dutchman has shown he deserves a longer, more consistent run, instead of being called up tournament after tournament. For that, matters pertaining to the running of the Pakistan Hockey Federation must be settled. The PHF had split into two factions ahead of the Azlan Shah Cup. The governments intervention resolved the dispute at least until the end of the tournament but a final decision is yet to be reached. Pakistan have failed to qualify for the last three Olympics and that woeful run will continue if matters are not resolved. Oltmans and his charges have provided hope, and with the better running of PHF, there is an opportunity for Pakistan to return to its former standing in world hockey. It should not be missed. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : The lethal troika
Description : MANY factors were responsible for the defeat of the erstwhile Soviet Union and then the US in Afghanistan. A common factor was the existence of a combination of extremely resilient militant groups resisting both superpowers. This combination consisted of three categories of militants: local Afghan militants resisting foreign invaders; Pakistani militants crossing over to help their Afghan brethren; and thousands of mujahideen from various countries, particularly in the Middle East, participating in the Afghan jihad. With some variations in their composition, role and external supporters, they fought together against the US and USSR for 30 years, forcing them to withdraw. Alarmingly, after the US withdrawal from Afghanistan in 2021, this Afghanistan-based lethal troika now targets Pakistan. The situation necessitates a fundamental shift in the terrorist threat assessment in Pakistan  from focusing exclusively on the Tehreek-i-Taliban Pakistan to broadening the threat calculus to the troika of the TTP, Afghan Taliban, and Al Qaeda. Concerning the nexus between the Taliban and TTP, the latest UN report on Afghanistan states that the Afghan government was supplying weapons, training facilities and regular financial packages to the TTP. Al Qaedas primary goal, after lying low in the region for many years, is to revive itself without annoying its Afghan hosts or attracting the Wests adverse attention. In view of this, it seems to have opted to carry out its activities in Pakistan through the TTP, while staying below the international radar. The importance Al Qaeda gives to the TTP is evident in that it selected 15 of its commanders to assist the group conduct terrorist attacks in Pakistan. It also supplied armed fighters to the TTP in its attack in Chitral in September 2023, which killed four security officials. Al Qaedas camp in Kunar, headed by Hakim ul Masri, is responsible for training suicide bombers for the TTP. The TTP, which has been the most lethal terrorist group in Pakistan over the last three years, is on the same page with the Taliban and Al Qaeda not only because of an ideological affinity and a shared history of fighting foreign invaders in Afghanistan, but also due to similar goals of Sharia enforcement in Pakistan. The TTP intends to replicate in Pakistan what the Taliban did in Afghanistan. There were reports of the TTP helping the other two members of the troika by killing Taliban members defecting to the rival Islamic State-Khorasan Province in Afghanistan. The basic point is that while the troika is united on targeting Pakistan, the members play different roles. The Taliban are likely to help TTP discreetly in Afghanistan by providing sanctuary, with Al Qaeda supporting both openly in Afghanistan through mentoring and in Pakistan through its sympathisers. With its edge, the TTP is likely to carry out ground attacks in Pakistan and lead a campaign to build up its narrative of violent extremism. As far as the strategy and tactics to be adopted by the troika go, the TTP intends to replicate in Pakistan what the Taliban did in Afghanistan. In a recent interview to Khorasan Diary, TTP ameer Noor Wali Mehsud stated, our jihad in Pakistan  has entered a decisive phase. He went on to say ominously: Pakistani security agencies have unjustly occupied our homeland and our goal is to liberate our homeland and implement the divine law. In a nutshell, the TTP seems to be falling back on the two-point narrative of resistance in Afghanistan, ie, liberation of homeland and enforcement of divine laws. This brings us to the likely impact of the troika on the terrorist threat landscape in Pakistan. Since 2021, the number of terrorist attacks in Pakistan has been consistently increasing every year. This is likely to continue in 2024, with three possible changes. One, the number of Afghan nationals taking part in terrorist attacks in Pakistan may increase  we recall here the suicide bombing against military personnel in 2023 in Bannu by Afghans. Two, given its penchant for high-profile attacks, Al Qaeda may train the TTP to carry out such attacks. Three, given that the top Al Qaeda and Taliban instructors will train TTP members, the quality and sophistication of the attacks in 2024 are likely to be enhanced. Another area likely to be impacted by the troika is infiltration. Earlier, in the 1990s, Al Qaeda infiltrated educational institutions such as Karachi and Punjab universities to recruit educated youth. These recruitment cells in universities may be reactivated. Also, to stay abreast of latest government planning in counterterrorism, the TTP, like the Taliban did in Afghanistan, may attempt to infiltrate government departments, including intel agencies. The third and most important dimension of infiltration is that of the military, which was carried out by Al Qaeda in Pakistan in the late 1990s. It may be pertinent to mention that the last attempted terrorist attack by Al Qaeda was in 2014 in Karachi, when a group of naval officers tried to hijack a navy frigate and crash into a US ship in the open seas. Al Qaeda worked somewhat openly in Pakistan from the 1980s to 2001, and built up an elaborate network of civilian volunteers in many cities of Pakistan, who assisted in collecting funds, recruiting volunteers, and providing hideouts for the group. These sleeper cells might again be contacted by it and reactivated. Similarly, there were some Pakistani militant organisations of the 1980s, like the Harkatul Mujahideen, Lashkar-e-Taiba, etc, sympathetic to Al Qaeda and lying low these days. Al Qaeda may re-establish contact with them and get their support for the TTP. Finally, both the Taliban and Al Qaeda are known for their high-quality propaganda campaign. The TTP media wing lacks that finesse. In the light of guidance from the Taliban and Al Qaeda, we are likely to witness a significant improvement in the quality of propaganda. As Sun Tsu stated, if you know your enemy and you know yourself, you need not fear the result of a hundred battles. Sadly, it seems that Pakistan is erring in assessing the collective capabilities of the TTP, supported by the Taliban and Al Qaeda. The writer is a former police officer who was Nactas first national coordinator. Published in Dawn, May 11th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : IMF mission to meet Pakistani authorities next week to discuss next phase of engagement: official
Description : An International Monetary Fund (IMF) mission will meet Pakistani authorities next week to discuss the next phase of engagement, an official from the international money lender said on Sunday. Speaking to Dawn.com, Esther Perez Ruiz, the Funds resident representative for Pakistan, said: A mission team led by Nathan Porter, IMFs mission chief to Pakistan, will meet with authorities next week to discuss the next phase of engagement. The aim is to lay the foundation for better governance and stronger, more inclusive, and resilient economic growth that will benefit all Pakistanis, she added. Pakistan last month completed a short-term $3 billion programme, which helped stave off sovereign default, but the government has stressed the need for a fresh, longer-term programme. Last week, the Fund said that a mission was expected to visit Pakistan this month to discuss the FY25 budget, policies, and reforms under a potential new programme for the welfare of all Pakistanis. Pakistan narrowly averted default last summer, and the $350bn economy has stabilised after the completion of the last IMF programme, with inflation coming down to around 17 per cent in April from a record high 38pc last May. The country is still dealing with a high fiscal shortfall and while the external account deficit has been controlled through import control mechanisms, it has come at the expense of stagnating growth, which is expected to be around 2pc this year compared to negative growth last year. Pakistan is expected to seek at least $6bn and request additional financing from the Fund under the Resilience and Sustainability Trust. On Friday, the Fund said that downside risks for the economy remain exceptionally high. Downside risks remain exceptionally high. While the new government has indicated its intention to continue the SBAs (standby arrangement) policies, political uncertainty remains significant, said the IMF in its staff report following the second and final review under the standby agreement. The Fund added that political complexities and high cost of living could weigh on policy, adding that policy slippages, together with lower external financing, could undermine the narrow path to debt sustainability and place pressure on the exchange rate. The IMF also said higher commodity prices and disruptions to shipping, or tighter global financial conditions, would also adversely affect external stability for the cash-strapped nation. The fund stressed the need for timely post-programme external financing disbursements. Additional input from Reuters Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Exports to Europe fall despite GSP+
Description : ISLAMABAD: Pakistans exports to European countries declined 6.27 per cent in the first nine months of the current fiscal year. Exports to the European Union states have begun to dip in the current fiscal year despite a GSP+ status that allows most Pakistani goods a duty-free entrance into European markets. In October 2023, the European Parliament unanimously voted to extend the GSP+ status for another four years until 2027 for developing countries, including Pakistan, to enjoy duty-free or minimum duty on exports to Europe. In absolute terms, Pakistans exports to the EU dipped to $6.105bn in 9MFY24 from $6.27bn in the corresponding months of last year. According to figures compiled by the State Bank of Pakistan, the decline was mainly due to reduced demand for Pakistani goods in western, southern, and northern Europe. In FY23, exports to the EU dropped 4.41pc to $8.188bn from $8.566bn in the preceding fiscal year. Western Europe, which includes countries such as Germany, the Netherlands, France, Italy and Belgium, accounts for the largest portion of Pakistans exports to the EU. However, exports to this region have significantly decreased by 12pc. The export value stood at $2.947bn in the first nine months of FY24, down from $3.353bn during the same period last year. While exports to western, southern, and northern Europe have declined, there is a silver lining in the form of an uptick in exports to Eastern Europe. The exports saw an increase of 8.38pc to $466.19m in 9MFY24, up from $430.14m in the corresponding months last year. Exports to southern Europe declined 1.24pc to $2.216bn in 9MFY24 from $2.244bn in the corresponding period last year. In this region, exports to Spain grew 3.73pc to $1.084 in 9MFY24 from $1.045bn last year. Exports to Italy declined 3.22pc to $825.44m in 9MFY24, compared to $852.93 m in the same period last year. However, exports to northern Europe witnessed a 2.31pc dip. The export value to this region stood at $475.92m, down from $487.19m in the corresponding period last year. Before Brexit, Pakistans major export destination was the United Kingdom. In the post-Brexit period, Pakistans exports to the UK slightly went up to $1.529bn in 9MFY24 from $1.494bn over the corresponding period of last year, indicating an increase of 2.34pc. In FY23, Pakistans exports dipped by 10.63pc to $1.966bn to the UK from $2.20bn in the same period of the preceding year. The British government, however, has assured Islamabad that there will be no change in the post-Brexit scenario, as evident from Pakistans inclusion in its preferential market access scheme. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : UAE hits out at Netanyahu for saying it may help run Gaza
Description : CAIRO: The United Arab Emirates hit out at Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu on Saturday after the Israeli leader said the Gulf state could be involved in aiding a future government in Gaza after the war. The prominent and influential Gulf state is one of few Arab states with official diplomatic ties to Israel, which it has maintained through Israels more than six-month war in Gaza, although relations appear to have become frayed. Foreign Minister Sheikh Abdullah bin Zayed Al Nahyan rebuked Netanyahu in an early morning post on X, saying Abu Dhabi denounced the Israeli leaders comments.
The UAE stresses that the Israeli prime minister does not have any legal capacity to take this step, and the UAE refuses to be drawn into any plan aimed at providing cover for the Israeli presence in the Gaza Strip, he said in an Arabic post. Sheikh Abdullah said the UAE would be prepared to support a Palestinian government that met the hopes and aspirations of the Palestinian people, which he said included independence. In an interview, Netanyahu said the UAE, Saudi Arabia and other countries could possibly assist a civilian government with Gazans in the enclave after the war. Sources said that Abu Dhabis relationship with Netanyahu has fractured over the military campaign, with Emirati officials now rarely speaking with him. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : SOUNDSCAPE: AND NOW, AI MUSIC
Description : In March, we saw the launch of a ChatGPT for music called Suno, which uses generative AI to produce realistic songs on demand from short text prompts. A few weeks later, a similar competitor  Udio  arrived on the scene. Ive been working with various creative computational tools for the past 15 years, both as a researcher and a producer, and the recent pace of change has floored me.  As Ive argued elsewhere, the view that AI systems will never make real music like humans do should be understood more as a claim about social context than technical capability. The argument, Sure, it can make expressive, complex-structured, natural-sounding, virtuosic, original music that can stir human emotions, but AI cant make proper music, can easily begin to sound like something from a Monty Python sketch. AI can now generate entire songs on demand. What does this mean for music as we know it? After playing with Suno and Udio, Ive been thinking about what it is exactly they change  and what they might mean not only for the way professionals and amateur artists create music, but the way all of us consume it. Expressing emotion without feeling it Generating audio from text prompts in itself is nothing new. However, Suno and Udio have made an obvious development: from a simple text prompt, they generate song lyrics (using a ChatGPT-like text generator), feed them into a generative voice model, and integrate the vocals with generated music to produce a coherent song segment. This integration is a small but remarkable feat. The systems are very good at making up coherent songs that sound expressively sung (there I go anthropomorphising). The effect can be uncanny. I know its AI, but the voice can still cut through with emotional impact. When the music performs a perfectly executed end-of-bar pirouette into a new section, my brain gets some of those little sparks of pattern-processing joy that I might get listening to a great band. To me this highlights something sometimes missed about musical expression: AI doesnt need to experience emotions and life events to successfully express them in music that resonates with people. Music as an everyday language Like other generative AI products, Suno and Udio were trained on vast amounts of existing work by real humans  and there is much debate about those humans intellectual property rights. Nevertheless, these tools may mark the dawn of mainstream AI music culture. They offer new forms of musical engagement that people will just want to use, to explore, to play with and actually listen to for their own enjoyment. AI capable of end to end music creation is arguably not technology for makers of music, but for consumers of music. For now, it remains unclear whether users of Udio and Suno are creators or consumers  or whether the distinction is even useful. A long-observed phenomenon in creative technologies is that, as something becomes easier and cheaper to produce, it is used for more casual expression. As a result, the medium goes from an exclusive high art form to more of an everyday language  think what smartphones have done to photography. So imagine you could send your father a professionally produced song all about him for his birthday, with minimal cost and effort, in a style of his preference  a modern-day birthday card. Researchers have long considered this eventuality, and now we can do it. Happy birthday, dad! Can you create without control? Whatever these systems have achieved and may achieve in the near future, they face a glaring limitation: the lack of control. Text prompts are often not much good as precise instructions, especially in music. So these tools are fit for blind search  a kind of wandering through the space of possibilities  but not for accurate control. (Thats not to diminish their value. Blind search can be a powerful creative force.) Viewing these tools as a practising music producer, things look very different. Although Udios About page says anyone with a tune, some lyrics, or a funny idea can now express themselves in music, I dont feel I have enough control to express myself with these tools. I can see them being useful to seed raw materials for manipulation, much like samples and field recordings. But when Im seeking to express myself, I need control. Using Suno, I had some fun finding the most gnarly dark techno grooves I could get out of it. The result was something I would absolutely use in a track. But I found I could also just gladly listen. I felt no compulsion to add anything or manipulate the result to add my mark. And many jurisdictions have declared that you wont be awarded copyright for something just because you prompted it into existence with AI. For a start, the output depends just as much on everything that went into the AI  including the creative work of millions of other artists. Arguably, you didnt do the work of creation. You simply requested it. New musical experiences in the no-mans land between production and consumption So Udios declaration that anyone can express themselves in music is an interesting provocation. The people who use tools like Suno and Udio may be considered more consumers of music AI experiences than creators of music AI works or, as with many technological impacts, we may need to come up with new concepts for what theyre doing. A shift to generative music may draw attention away from current forms of musical culture, just as the era of recorded music saw the diminishing (but not death) of orchestral music, which was once the only way to hear complex, timbrally rich and loud music.  If engagement in these new types of music culture and exchange explodes, we may see reduced engagement in the traditional music consumption of artists, bands, radio and playlists. While it is too early to tell what the impact will be, we should be attentive. The effort to defend existing creators intellectual property protections, a significant moral rights issue, is part of this equation. But even if it succeeds, I believe it wont fundamentally address this potentially explosive shift in culture, and claims that such music might be inferior also have had little effect in halting cultural change historically, as with techno or even jazz, long ago.  Government AI policies may need to look beyond these issues to understand how music works socially and to ensure that our musical cultures are vibrant, sustainable, enriching and meaningful for both individuals and communities.  The writer is an Associate Professor at UNSW in Sydney, Australia Republished from The Conversation Published in Dawn, ICON, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : THE GRAPEVINE
Description : WARM GESTURE   Indian playback singer Arijit Singh recently did a concert in Dubai. The venue was bursting at the seams. In the audience, among other celebs, was Pakistans Mahira Khan. During the gig, the vocalist managed to spot the star of Raees in the house, so he immediately acknowledged her presence with a nice gesture, which was reciprocated equally warmly by Mahira K. Ah, if only our politicians emulated our artists, this region could have cut a sweet-sounding, rosy picture. MORE PRE-WEDDING FUN   Those of you who missed Pakistani stars presence in the pre-wedding celebrations of Anant Ambani and Radhika Merchant in Jamnagar, India, its time to feel okay. For the uninitiated, Anant A is the son of a businessman with unimaginable wealth and power, Mukesh Ambani. In the second leg of the celebrations in Londons high-end Stoke Park Estate owned by Mukesh A, Rahat Fateh Ali Khan and Atif Aslam were the most notable imports. They sang their hearts out and lived up to their billing. By billing here we do mean big billing. PICS DELETED   It was a bit of a head-scratching surprise for fans of Ranveer Singh and his wife Deepika Padukone to see that, on May 8, hubby dear deleted all his wedding pictures from his Instagram page. The good thing about it was that no one suspected that it was because of some kind of rockiness that may have occurred in their relationship. Some conjectured that Ranveer S is preparing for a promotional thingy for a project involving the couple. We say, sometimes no picture is worth a thousand  good and bad words. NO AFFAIR   Filmmaker Imtiaz Ali is currently basking in the success of his latest film, Chamkila. But he also spoke recently about his 2015 film Tamasha which didnt do well at the box office, despite its star cast including Ranbir Kapoor and Deepika Padukone. In an interview, talking about that films lead pairs remarkable chemistry in it (they had just broken up as a real life couple), he has said that people feel the two had an affair at the time of shooting, but it wasnt true. According to Imtiaz A, for actors theres a love for performing with each other, which is far more significant. Well, sir, humbly, the love for screen or stage performance also stems from a personal space. Wink! WEIGH YOUR WORDS   On April 24, when the legendary Barbra Streisand checked her social media pages to see who had wished her birthday, she saw a picture of Melissa McCarthy. She wrote to the film and stage actress whether she was using Ozempic (a controversial weight loss medicine). She instantly received flak from netizens. It led her to explain: I thought she looked fantastic. I just wanted to pay her a compliment. I forgot the world is reading. Not just that, Barbra S, the world is smart. DEFLECTING SCHUMER   Comedienne Amy Schumer seems to be someone who uses words indiscreetly. Take for example her claim vis-a-vis the conflict in Palestine, about which she has remarked, in classic whataboutery, that the focus is inordinately on the Jewish people rather than Hamas (were not going to quote what views she holds on the people of Gaza). Our very own Rasti Farooq has rightly taken issue with her statement, taking Amy S to the cleaners on Instagram. We agree with Rasti F, and would like to add, it aint funny Amy S just like your jokes. Published in Dawn, ICON, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : No such thing as strategic state-owned enterprises, says Finance Minister Aurangzeb
Description : Finance Minister Muhammad Aurangzeb on Sunday said that there was no such thing as strategic state-owned enterprises (SOEs) as he stressed the need for privatisation. He made the remarks at a pre-budget conference in Lahore, two days after  Deputy Prime Minister Ishaq Dar said the government would limit its business only to strategic and essential SOEs under its domain but their number would be reduced from 40 after scrutiny. Chairing the Cabinet Committee on Privatisation (CCoP) meeting, which was attended by the finance minister, Dar said privatisation of loss-making SOEs would be a priority. The meeting noted that 40 SOEs were currently categorised as strategic or essential, but respective ministries would submit their details to the Cabinet Committee on State-Owned Enterprises (CCoSOE). The CCoSOE will determine the status of the SOEs to be categorised as strategic or essential entities. Speaking on Sunday, Aurangzeb said: There is no such as [a] strategic SOE. Talking about the meeting chaired by Dar on Friday, he continued, We are absolutely on the same wavelength  that there is no such thing as a strategic SOE. The finance minister said that a meeting would be held tomorrow where we will go back to various ministries and say that all this should be handed over to the private sector. There will be public-private partnership and we will accelerate the privatisation agenda, he said. Commenting on concerns regarding the privatisation of Pakistan International Airlines (PIA), Aurangzeb said the government was not just looking at foreign investors. They are local and foreign investors who are bidding [] there is no such thing that we are only looking at foreign investors, he said. Commenting on a fresh loan programme with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) programme, he said that a larger and longer programme was needed to bring permanence in macroeconomic stability and structural reforms. He also talked about energy reforms, saying that there were leakages and stressed the need for stopping theft. He said that changes were being brought to the boards of distribution companies (Discos) in order to bring in those from the private sector for better corporate governance. And then you will see how we bring those Discos towards concessions or privatisation or a combination of both, he emphasised. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : IMF mission to meet Pakistani authorities next week to discuss next phase of engagement: official
Description : An International Monetary Fund (IMF) mission will meet Pakistani authorities next week to discuss the next phase of engagement, an official from the international money lender said on Sunday. Speaking to Dawn.com, Esther Perez Ruiz, the Funds resident representative for Pakistan, said: A mission team led by Nathan Porter, IMFs mission chief to Pakistan, will meet with authorities next week to discuss the next phase of engagement. The aim is to lay the foundation for better governance and stronger, more inclusive, and resilient economic growth that will benefit all Pakistanis, she added. Pakistan last month completed a short-term $3 billion programme, which helped stave off sovereign default, but the government has stressed the need for a fresh, longer-term programme. Last week, the Fund said that a mission was expected to visit Pakistan this month to discuss the FY25 budget, policies, and reforms under a potential new programme for the welfare of all Pakistanis. Pakistan narrowly averted default last summer, and the $350bn economy has stabilised after the completion of the last IMF programme, with inflation coming down to around 17 per cent in April from a record high 38pc last May. The country is still dealing with a high fiscal shortfall and while the external account deficit has been controlled through import control mechanisms, it has come at the expense of stagnating growth, which is expected to be around 2pc this year compared to negative growth last year. Pakistan is expected to seek at least $6bn and request additional financing from the Fund under the Resilience and Sustainability Trust. On Friday, the Fund said that downside risks for the economy remain exceptionally high. Downside risks remain exceptionally high. While the new government has indicated its intention to continue the SBAs (standby arrangement) policies, political uncertainty remains significant, said the IMF in its staff report following the second and final review under the standby agreement. The Fund added that political complexities and high cost of living could weigh on policy, adding that policy slippages, together with lower external financing, could undermine the narrow path to debt sustainability and place pressure on the exchange rate. The IMF also said higher commodity prices and disruptions to shipping, or tighter global financial conditions, would also adversely affect external stability for the cash-strapped nation. The fund stressed the need for timely post-programme external financing disbursements. Additional input from Reuters Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Situation in AJK calms down after 2 days of violent clashes
Description : Following violent clashes over the last 48 hours, which left a policeman dead, the situation in Muzaffarabad seemed to have calmed down on Sunday, with a Rangers detachment that was sent to Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK) from Kohala having been withdrawn. AJK witnessed violent clashes between the police and activists of a rights movement amid a wheel-jam and shutter-down strike across the territory on Friday and Saturday, which left at least one police official dead and more than 90 others injured, officials told Dawn.com on Saturday. Mirpur Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP) Kamran Ali had said that Sub-inspector Adnan Qureshi succumbed to a gunshot wound in the chest in the town of Islamgarh, where he was deployed to stop a rally for Muzaffarabad under the banner of the Jammu Kashmir Joint Awami Action Committee (JAAC). The JAAC, which has traders at the forefront in most parts of the state, has been seeking the provision of electricity as per hydropower generation cost in AJK, subsidised wheat flour and an end to the privileges of the elite class. They called for the strike following the arrest of at least 70 of their members in raids on Thursday. Reports emerged in the wake of the protests on Sunday that three Rangers battalions had entered the territory through Kohala and were awaiting further orders. However, AJK Minister for Rural Development Faisal Mumtaz Rathore confirmed that the Rangers, due to the intervention of President Asif Zardari, were called back as soon as they entered Azad Kashmir since the situation had calmed down. Meanwhile, in Islamabad, former prime minister of AJK Sardar Abdul Qayyum Niazi slammed the deployment, calling it a drama and an attempt to score political points. First they send them, then call them back, what is this? the ex-AJK PM said. Those fighting for their rights and engaging in protest are free to do so, but they must remain peaceful, Niazi said in a press conference. He added that they (the protestors) must not give the enemy a chance to sow discord within the territory and create infighting. In a post on Facebook, Rathore acknowledged the public demands for cheap electricity, but admitted that addressing them was out of his hands. The big demand of the people, the demand for cheap electricity and the end of loadshedding, falls under the jurisdiction of the Government of Pakistan, Rathore said. Urging the public to remain peaceful, he said, In this one year [I have been in office], I have never been against the right to peaceful protest and [never] supported violence against people. In the aftermath of the protests, JAAC leader Shaukat Nawaz Mir reiterated that the committee is a peaceful organisation and willing to negotiate with the authorities to ensure the provision of cheap electricity and cheap flour. He also appreciated the withdrawal of the Rangers from the area. We have planned another shutter-down strike, he told reporters on Sunday. We have been peaceful for the last year and always will be a peaceful movement. This territory and its institutions and police are our own. Mir maintained that the JAAC is advocating for the rights of the public in AJK, but it is the bureaucrats who do not understand the publics needs that are doing the damage. The JAAC is peaceful and open to negotiations, Mir added, requesting to be notified by the authorities about decisions taken. We do not want to hurt anyone. He also slammed the federal government for not cutting down spending while at the same time claiming they have no room in the budget to subsidise electricity or flour. The government claims they cant provide cheap electricity and flour because they have no budget, but they have the money for watches and cars, Mir said, adding that the federal government and the prime minister should be ashamed. I dont want my forum to be controversial, Mir said. We are made up of respectable politicians  the local council is standing with us. The JAAC leader added that the movement was successful since members of multiple parties and councils are on our side. Our nation is conscious now. There is no politics here, we just want our rights and identity. Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif has taken notice of the situation in AJK and urged PML-N leadership and AJK prime minister Chaudhry Anwar-ul-Haq to pursue negotiations with the JAAC. Posting on X, he said, While debate, discussion and peaceful protests are the beauties of democracy, there should be absolutely no tolerance for taking the law in ones own hands and damaging government properties. He added that amidst situations of chaos and dissent, there will always be people who rush in to score political points.
The prime minister said that he was in contact with PML-N leaders and the AJK government, urging them to talk to the JAAC and resort to [a] peaceful course of action for resolution of their (JAACs) demands. Shehbaz added that despite the efforts of detractors, the issue will be resolved soon. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Fight till the last ball, PCB chief tells cricket team in Dublin
Description : Pakistan Cricket Board (PCB) Chairman Mohsin Naqvi on Sunday told the national team to fight till the last ball ahead of the second match of a three-match T20 series against Ireland. As he met players of the mens national team in the Irish capital of Dublin, the PCB quoted him as saying: Fight till the last ball; the competition should be apparent.
On Friday, Ireland recorded their maiden T20 win against Pakistan who could not defend a solid-looking 182-5 after being put in to bat first, dealing a shocking blow to the Babar Azam-led sides preparations for the World Cup, which is taking place next month in the United States. The loss to Ireland, who are in Pakistans group in the T20 World Cup, came after a series draw on home soil to a New Zealand squad missing most of their first-choice players. With Babar only recently reinstated as captain, it was another bump in the road for their tournament preparation.
Todays match will start at 7pm, with Ireland leading the series by 1-0. In a post on X, the PCB shared a video of Naqvi meeting the Green Shirts and speaking to them, adding that a detailed discussion on the action plan took place during the two-hour-long meetup. Encouraging the team, the PCB chairman urged the players to play with hard work, passion and a professional approach. He noted that T20 cricket needed a unique and aggressive approach, adding that victory was only possible if cricket was played in a modern manner. An action plan can be formulated while sitting in a room but the real test is on the ground, where the performance should be visible, the PCB quoted him as telling the team. Naqvi praised all players as undoubtedly talented, professional and the best, adding that the teams bowling attack was splendid. However, he emphasised that great attention was required when fielding so that the opponent cannot get any chance to score. The players are the hope for Pakistan and you have to meet the nations expectations. Teamwork is the fundamental thing for victory, the PCB chairman said. He noted that the public loved cricket and had expectations from the team. Naqvi said that success would come if all 11 of the players in the team performed with unity. No one is accepting the loss in the first match against Ireland. The real test after Ireland and England is the World Cup, he added. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Canada arrests fourth Indian national in killing of Sikh activist
Description : A fourth Indian national was charged by Canadian authorities on Saturday in the 2023 killing of a separatist Sikh leader in Vancouver. Amandeep Singh, 22, was already being held for unrelated gun charges before being charged with first-degree murder and conspiracy to commit murder in the slaying of Hardeep Singh Nijjar. Three other Indian nationals were arrested this month. The killing sparked a diplomatic row between Ottawa and New Delhi when Prime Minister Justin Trudeau linked Indian intelligence to the killing. Nijjar  who immigrated to Canada in 1997 and became a citizen in 2015  had advocated for a separate Sikh state, known as Khalistan, carved out of India. He had been wanted by Indian authorities for alleged terrorism and conspiracy to commit murder  allegations he denied. He was shot dead on June 18, 2023, by masked assailants in the parking lot of the Sikh temple he led in suburban Vancouver. Trudeau announced several months later that Canada had credible allegations connecting Indian intelligence to the slaying. India dismissed the allegations as absurd and responded furiously, briefly curbing visas for Canadians and forcing Ottawa to withdraw diplomats. In November, the US Justice Department charged an Indian citizen living in the Czech Republic with allegedly plotting a similar assassination attempt on American soil. Prosecutors said in unsealed court documents that an Indian government official was also involved in the planning. The shock allegations came after US President Joe Biden hosted Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi for a rare state visit, as Washington seeks closer ties with India against Chinas growing influence. US intelligence agencies have assessed that the plot on American soil was approved by Indias top spy official at the time, Samant Goel, the Washington Post reported in April. Canada is home to some 770,000 Sikhs, who make up about two per cent of the countrys population, with a vocal minority calling for an independent state of Khalistan. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Second night of auroras seen amid extreme solar storm
Description : Auroras lit up skies across swaths of the planet for the second night in a row on Saturday, after already dazzling Earthlings from the United States to Tasmania to the Bahamas the day before. A powerful solar storm  which could continue into Sunday  has triggered spectacular celestial shows usually confined to the far northern reaches of the planet, hence their nickname of the northern lights. I have the sensation of living through a historic night in France [] It was really charged, with solar particles and emotions, Eric Lagadec, an astrophysicist at the Observatoire de Cote dAzur, wrote on social media after the first night. Find good spots, away from the lights, with a clear view to the north! Late on Saturday evening, pictures again started trickling onto social media as people in the United States reported sightings, though not as strong as Friday nights. The first of several coronal mass ejections (CMEs)  expulsions of plasma and magnetic fields from the Sun   came just after 4pm GMT on Friday, according to the US-based National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)s Space Weather Prediction Center (SWPC). It was later upgraded to an extreme geomagnetic storm   the first since the Halloween Storms of October 2003 that caused blackouts in Sweden and damaged power infrastructure in South Africa. Fridays storm was listed as hitting level five geomagnetic conditions  the highest on the scale. Saturday saw G3 to G5 conditions, with G4 or higher conditions predicted Sunday and G3 conditions possible into Monday. But no major disruptions to power or communications networks appear to have been reported this time around, despite initial worries from authorities. There have only been preliminary reports of power grid irregularities, degradation to high-frequency communications, GPS and possibly satellite navigation, the SWPC said. Elon Musk, whose Starlink satellite internet operator has some 5,000 satellites in low Earth orbit, said his satellites were under a lot of pressure, but holding up so far. However Chinas National Centre for Space Weather issued a red alert on Saturday morning, warning the storm will impact communications and navigation in most areas of the country, state news agency Xinhua reported. Auroras were visible in the northern half of the country, according to media reports. Excitement over the phenomenon   and otherworldly photos of pink, green and purple night skies   popped up across the world, from Mont Saint-Michel on the French coast to Payette, Idaho  in the western United States  to Australias island state of Tasmania.
People pose for photos as a geomagnetic storm lights up the night sky above the Bonneville Salt Flats on May 10 in Wendover, Utah.  AFP
Unlike solar flares, which travel at the speed of light and reach Earth in around eight minutes, CMEs travel at a more sedate pace, with officials putting the current average at 800 kilometres per second. The CMEs emanated from a massive sunspot cluster that is 17 times wider than our planet. People with eclipse glasses can also look for the sunspot cluster during the day. The Sun is approaching the peak of an 11-year cycle that brings heightened activity. NOAAs Brent Gordon encouraged the public to try to capture the night sky with phone cameras even if they couldnt see auroras with their naked eyes. Youd be amazed at what you see in that picture versus what you see with your eyes. Fluctuating magnetic fields associated with geomagnetic storms induce currents in long wires, including power lines, which can potentially lead to blackouts. Long pipelines can also become electrified, leading to engineering problems. Spacecraft are also at risk from high doses of radiation, although the atmosphere prevents this from reaching Earth. NASA has a dedicated team looking into astronaut safety and can ask astronauts on the International Space Station to move to places within the outpost that are better shielded. Even pigeons and other species that have internal biological compasses could be affected. Pigeon handlers have noted a reduction in birds coming home during geomagnetic storms, according to NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The most powerful geomagnetic storm in recorded history, known as the Carrington Event after British astronomer Richard Carrington, occurred in September 1859. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : ADB links support with IMFs clean chit
Description :   Given my interactions with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the dialogue decisiveness of the current government, I feel very hopeful that there will be a successor programme from the Fund, said the Asian Development Banks (ADB) Country Director for Pakistan Yong Ye in an exclusive interview on the sidelines of ADBs 57th Annual Meeting in Tbilisi this week. Tacitly indicating that support from ADB would only be possible with a clean chit from the Fund, Mr Ye expressed cautious optimism for the economy. Highlighting the uncertainties from last year, Mr Ye termed the IMF agreement announced in June as a miracle. Since then, however, he said, the caretaker government did a good job stabilising the economy under the Funds Stand-By Arrangement. More importantly, he added, with the IMF agreement in place, the central banks foreign exchange reserves increased from $4.4 billion to over $9bn in the week ending on May 3. While the country may still be in the ICU, its immediate liquidity crisis has been sorted, and default has been avoided. This has given some confidence to the markets, he said. Record highs of PSX Commenting on the frequent new highs of the Pakistan Stock Exchange (PSX), Mr Ye observed that previously, when the eurobond payment was due, there had been a lot of hype in the media with speculations about whether the country would be able to repay or default. Such pieces did not induce courage and the markets started fluctuating, contributing to a fluctuating exchange rate. Banks top official says Pakistan has sorted out immediate liquidity crisis, but still in ICU This time around, in April, when the $1bn eurobond payment was due, it was paid without fanfare, indicating much better market confidence. Other positive indicators, such as a narrowing external account deficit and recovering remittances, have also improved investor confidence. However, fiscal deficit challenges remain. One major reason behind them is the high interest rate and high debt servicing burden. Act on what you know In my first meeting with Finance Minister Muhammad Aurangzeb, he showed his commitment to implementing and acting on reforms, said Mr Ye. Pakistan does not need more economic prescriptions, he said, agreeing with the finance ministers recent statements. He said the general perception is that Pakistan knows what it needs to do but never does it. Act on what you know needs to be done. He emphasised that the ADB management wants to be with the government in this difficult time. The agency understands the need to ensure that the debt is sustainable rather than an added burden that does not remove the constraints the country is facing. While the economy is recovering, there is still uncertainty moving forward. The removal of this uncertainty depends very much on the governments commitment and ability to implement economic and structural reforms. A special arrangement Mr Ye emphasised the importance of investment in reviving the economy and the role the Special Investment Facilitation Council (SIFC) could play. My understanding of SIFC is that it is a special arrangement to attract foreign direct investment from some targeted countries, he said. From the ADBs point of view, while the SIFC may be a quick short-term solution, Pakistan still needs to look for long-term systematic solutions to attract foreign direct investment. This would require an overall enabling environment with improved regulations and transparency. Given past unsuccessful incidents such as Reko Diq, SIFC, at least in the short run, can demonstrate the countrys potential and ability for investment, which can then be further broadened for other countries. An important element in attracting FDI is the ability of firms to repatriate profit out of the country. At the moment, investors may believe that while earning money in Pakistan is possible, repatriating profits is challenging. Non-productivity of real estate The country needs to increase its revenue and rationalise expenditures, Mr Ye remarked. As an example, he highlights the real estate sector where a lot of savings are invested. The real estate sector is just financial addition with no value addition. If the country invests in its natural resources instead, the country will start rolling, he said. Inflation is on a downward trend, and if this trend continues, the monetary policy rate will come down, Mr Ye opinioned, resulting in a smaller burden of debt servicing and more fiscal room. This will also unlock the investment and borrowing by the private sector, he hoped. Since there is a lot of pent-up investment demand during the period of high interest rates, Pakistan may enter into a boom cycle when the rates start coming down. But for the revival to be sustainable, it all comes back to reforms, he said.  Remaining pledges While ADB was among the institutions that pledged support after the disastrous floods of 2022, almost the entire amount has yet to be disbursed. ADB had pledged about $1.5bn, of which only $108.79 million has been released according to a media report, with a further $340.9m expected this year. In response to why there has been a delay, Mr Ye said that the amount pledged was for reconstruction and that the process cannot be rushed. The damages have to be assessed along with the ground realities, keeping in mind the new climate risk profile and the possibility that these areas may be flooded again, he said. Pointing out that water was still standing in some areas till the start of this year, Mr Ye said that the new climate risk profile needs to be assessed before the feasibility study. Some roads need to be redesigned, followed by the procurement process, contract award, and finally, disbursement. The entire process is lengthy. Mr Ye identified several critical areas for Pakistans long-term economic growth. These include controlling inflation, reducing the fiscal deficit, and diversifying the export base. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Govt hints at raising wheat purchase target
Description :  Drive to buy 400,000 tonnes of grain kicks off; farmers want wheat procured from across Punjab
 Kissan leader urges govt to ensure official rate of staple, terms proposed subsidy a pittance LAHORE: The Pakistan Agricultural Storage and Services Corporation Limited (Passco) on Saturday began its second phase of wheat procurement from Faisalabad in line with a decision of the federal government to procure 400,000 tonnes more than the original target of 1.4 million tonnes. As he kick-started the second phase, Food Minister Rana Tanveer hinted at the possibility of further increasing the target to facilitate farmers. Passco had originally aimed to purchase 1.4m tonnes, but after farmers started protesting, the pressure on the federal and provincial governments piled on and the premier decided to increase the target to 1.8m tonnes. As of now, Passco has achieved 98 per cent of the initial target and distribution of gunny bags is already underway to meet the increased target. Farmers, however, are not happy with the governments decision to procure slightly more wheat than intended. They said Passco  a federal body  operated in 13 out of 97 tehsils in Punjab and the decision to purchase additional wheat from designated areas would have a negligible impact. According to farmers, the tradeable surplus this year is expected to be about 10m tonnes and buying 400,000 tonnes would hardly make any difference. Punjab, on the other hand, is reluctant to procure wheat from growers despite province-wide agitations and the persistent stance of farmers. This has also caused a significant impact on the price of wheat, with the staple being sold at a rate much lower than the official price of Rs3,900 per 40kg. The Pakistan Kissan Ittehad claimed that farmers had lost Rs1,150 billion under the wheat head alone due to the crashing prices which reportedly dipped below Rs3,000 per 40kg. Instead of procurement, the Punjab government said it would compensate farmers with interest-free loans of Rs150bn. Kissan leader Khalid Mahmood Khokar, however, is not impressed, saying the paltry subsidy came at a cost of Rs1,150bn. Instead of this gimmickry, please ensure an officially declared price, which the provincial government had itself calculated, announced, and promised, Mr Khalid urged the Punjab government. The crisis Pakistan is going through the most difficult wheat season of its history, exacerbated by policy failure and the import of millions of tonnes of wheat shortly before the bumper harvest. The bumper crop followed a record import of 3.5m tonnes by the private sector allegedly due to the weakness of the caretaker regime.
Against the backdrop of such a huge import, hoarders also released their stock to earn profit. The releases of stock by the hoarders and the import of the commodity flooded the market and even met the entire domestic requirement, leaving Passco and the Punjab Food Department with 4m tonnes of unexhausted stock. The 3.5m tonnes imports were staggered in a way, in the name of sustained supplies, that it overlapped with domestic harvesting season and created havoc for the domestic market, explained Muhammad Ramzan, a wheat trader from Lahore. At the start of this month, the Punjab government had promised a probe into the wheat scandal against the backdrop of protests by the farmers. On Friday, the farmers resumed their protests from Multan against the provincial governments decision to not buy wheat from farmers. At the protest, PKI leader Khokhar had said the agitation would continue against the government in every district of the province till the acceptance of their demands. He had said the federal government was procuring the wheat in 16 tehsils of the province, while the Punjab government had not purchased even a single grain so far. Federal government should also buy wheat from other tehsils of the province, he had demanded. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : KP governor, CM Gandapur exchange threats in acrid spat
Description : PESHAWAR / DERA ISMAIL KHAN: The acrimony between Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Chief Minister Ali Amin Khan Gandapur and Governor Faisal Karim Kundi intensified on Saturday when the two leaders threatened each other with dire consequences. A day after the governors fiery speech, Chief Minister Gandapur warned Governor Kundi to stay within the limits of his constitutional position and avoid making olitical statements. After appearing in an anti-terrorism court in connection with the murder of former KP law minister Sardar Israrullah Khan Gandapur, the CM who belongs to the PTI said he could use his powers to banish Mr Kundi from Governor House. This Governor House is not your property. Dont force me to  turn it into a museum and open it for the public.
I will shift you to a two-room annexe, said Mr Gandapur. He went on to say that even fuel for the governors official vehicles comes from the budget of the provincial government and threatened to stop it if the governor who belongs to PPP didnt refrain from political statements, below-the-belt remarks and confrontation. Gandapur warns Kundi will be banished from official residence for indulging in politics, confrontation Youre the governor; politics is not your job, Mr Gandapur warned, calling himself the elected representative who came to power with the voters mandate. The CM added that if the governor did not pay heed to his warning, he would seek his removal. [T]he letter which notified you [as governor] will also denotify you. In a hard-hitting speech on Friday, Governor Kundi had indirectly accused the CM of being involved in the killing of former law minister Mr Israrullah and ANP leader Umar Khattab Sherani.
Mr Israrullah was killed in a suicide attack in his hometown of Kulachi near Dera Ismail Khan in October 2013. While government officials blamed the Waziristan-based Gandapur group for the bombing, a little-known shadowy group, Ansarul Mujahideen, claimed responsibility. ANPs Mr Sherani was murdered in December 2021, a day before the provinces local government elections, which he was contesting as a candidate for the post of D.I. Khan mayor. The governor said that if he relinquished his constitutional post, he would prove to be a bigger nemesis for CM Gandapur. Mr Kundi also warned that protecting the Governor House was his constitutional duty and whoever tried to occupy it would be dragged on roads. This was an apparent reply to Mr Gandapurs May 9 statement in which he warned against efforts to impose governors rule in KP and said PTI activists would occupy the Governor House. Want good ties with CM Meanwhile, in conversation with Dawn, Mr Kundi said he hoped for good relations with the chief minister, but whoever talked about occupying the Governor House will be answered befittingly. People of KP shouldnt suffer in the fight between the prime minister, governor and chief minister, he said, advising the provincial government to improve the law and order situation. He recalled the kidnapping of a sessions judge in Tank last month and claimed the chief minister paid extortion money for his release. Expected animosity The acrimonious relationship between the two leaders  both being bitter political rivals hailing from D.I.Khan  was expected since Mr Kundi was nominated for the post by his partys chairman, Bilawal Bhutto-Zardari. The CM expressed his disapproval of the appointment by not attending  Mr Kundis oath-taking ceremony last Saturday. A few days later, on May 8, the governor KP did not sign a summary moved by the provincial government to convene an assembly session, forcing the provincial government to requisition the session through the speaker to present the current fiscal budget, according to sources. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Footprints: the day the city of Karachi went berserk
Description : This article was originally published on May 12, 2017 KARACHI: Attempt after attempt fails to elicit comments from direct witnesses to the carnage that took place in Karachi on May 12 ten years ago. All these men served as judges in the countrys high courts and the apex court before they retired to re-join the legal fraternity as seasoned practitioners of the law. For each of my requests, I receive either excuse me, or sorry. Finally, one of them agrees to talk  but not openly.  Please dont mention my name, says the retired Sindh High Court judge as our conversation ends. You may write each and every word I have shared with you but not my name. I would prefer to be an anonymous source. One never knows here what can happen the next day: its better to stay away from even the memories of such controversial events. The ordeal he recalls of that bloody Saturday refreshes the grim memories of the city being under siege for nearly 24 hours, held hostage by forces in the face of whom even jurists and law-enforcers were helpless.  Two rival rallies had been planned that day  one by the legal fraternity, backed by parties then in the opposition, to welcome into the city the then deposed chief justice, Iftikhar Mohammed Chaudhry, and the other organised by the Muttahida Qaumi Movement (MQM), favoured by the then military dictator General Pervez Musharraf, in protest against the politicisation of the issue of the presidential reference against Mr Chaudhry. A certain level of fear had prevailed, but no one could have guessed the deeply disturbing events that were to follow  certainly not the then serving high court judge. I was travelling with my driver and armed guard to the Sindh High Court where the chief justice had to deliver an address when we were forced to stop near Sir Syed Girls College in Nazimabad, he says.  Armed motorcyclists surrounded his official, flag-bearing car, pulled out his driver and switched off its engine, seizing the keys. The bikers then bludgeoned the stationary car several times, so hard that its bumper fell off. In one of the busiest and most densely populated city neighbourhoods, a serving judge sat in fear.  I talked to them, he says. They were obviously aware that I was a high court judge. After debate and argument, they allowed me to leave but I reminded them that I couldnt because keys of my car had been snatched by one of them. Finally, the key was returned and the judge was allowed to leave. As he got back into his car, the men surrounding him came up with their last strike: they stripped his car of the national flag. At the nearest police station of Pak Colony, he waited for nearly two hours for police security to arrive, as promised by the Governors House after it was informed about the episode. Then came an SSP-ranking officer with his team to escort me, he says. The police left us some two kilometres from the Singh High Court building, saying that they could no longer help us. My driver parked the car at a safer place. Then, with my driver and guard, I walked to the high court to find all entrances blocked. Finally, I jumped over one of the walls to enter the building. If this was the experience of a high court judge, one can only imagine the situation for political workers. In anticipation of the two rallies, law enforcers had been put on high alert the day before. The fire brigade had been directed to remain on standby and hospitals were asked to ready themselves. But the next day, hapless citizens found that the city had been abandoned by the law-enforcement agencies, and armed youths were wandering at will. Nasir Khan, one of the Awami National Party workers, witnessed a few of them at Malir Halt. I meet Nasir almost at the same spot where he narrowly escaped death. As our rally from Quaidabad reached here [Malir Halt], it came under fire, he says. I miraculously remained unhurt but I watched two of my friends die from bullet wounds and several others fell injured. It was a terrible experience and even today I shiver while recalling that day. After 10 years, only eyewitness accounts of the May 12 events remain. Justice and any action on the part of the state are still awaited. Should we call ourselves humanity when the fallen remain un-avenged a year to a day since that fateful day in May? wrote Justice Qazi Faez Isa, a Supreme Court judge and former chief justice of the Balochistan High Court, in this paper in 2008. Years later, the question remains pertinent. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2017  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Mothers Day: Reflections of a mother
Description : This piece was originally published in Dawn, Young World on May 9, 2020. Spending sleepless nights while tending to children, feeding them, changing diapers, etc. are a part of life of every mother having infants. When the infants grow up a little, the next phase is to educate them, teach them manners and make them learn to be a part of the world out there. It is tough to do all that for me, like every other mother. After all it is not all I have to do. One has to focus on ones career and household chores at the same time, and fulfil ones duties towards other family members. Did I mention a me-time somewhere in all that I said? I guess not. There is no mentioning of it simply because there is no time left for me while doing all that I do. It is said that you learn about the true value of parents once you have children of your own. I have found this to be exactly true. The sacrifices and unconditional love it takes to be a mother has certainly made me realise the sacrifices my mother made in bringing me up. Looking back at my life, I wish I could change all those moments in my life when, as a child, I misbehaved with my mother. I also wish that I had spent more time with her and made life easier for her. As my children grow up, they seem to become less obedient and respectful. This really hurts. I see this as a general trend in all the children, nowadays. With some exceptions, the older they get, the less respect they show to their mother and elders in general. Having a mind of ones own is fine, but there cannot be any excuse for bad behaviour towards ones mother. And also just because your mother is less strict and more friendly than your father, it should not lead you to not show respect to her. Mothers like me do not want our children to be our puppets. All we ask for is recognition of our love and efforts. Expecting respectfulness is a part of that recognition. Every mother would love her child to come up to her and, as a minimum, thank her for her efforts. It would be great if the child could offer to help her in little ways. If nothing else, they should at least not leave any mess for the mother to clean up! Mothers Day is important, but it is more than just a special day. It is really a reminder that mothers deserve our respect and recognition for their love at all times. For a child to have this realisation certainly means more to mothers than having a card or flowers on Mothers Day. This is because it means that this realisation would translate into care and respect for ones mother. For my part, I have started taking care of my mother in all the ways I can. While I do not live with her, I try my best to stay in touch or visit her as much as I can. Taking care of her health and what she wants has become very important for me. It does not matter to me what others do or say about taking care of their mothers. All that matters is what my mother deserves. And that exactly is my message to you all! Do not look at what others do, think of what you can do for your mother, who deserves all the love and respect that one can. Mothers can be your friends too if you learn to share things with her. It is just a misunderstanding that they would not understand you or what you want. You can talk about anything with her: sports, cartoons, TV shows, super heroes, general knowledge, etc. You would be pleasantly surprised when you do end up confiding in her or discussing things with her. I am lucky that I get cards and flowers from my family on Mothers Day. But many things remain left to be desired on the other 364 days of the year. Still whatever my children do the rest of the year, I would never stop caring for and loving them. I guess thats what the motherhood is all about. Happy Mothers Day everyone, but make every day Mothers Day, for she never fails to make everyday special for her children. Published in Dawn, Young World, May 9th, 2020 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Indian elections
Description : THE Islamophobic rhetoric being employed by Narendra Modi for this election campaign has become shrill. Pakistan has nearly always been an electoral issue in India. However, this time, it is Indian Muslims who are bearing the brunt of the Indian prime ministers hate speech. Speaking in Rajasthan last month, he called Muslims infiltrators and said they produce too many children. In Gujarat, where, as chief minister, he had overseen the massacre of Muslims in 2002, he accused the Congress of seeking to loot Indias wealth and redistribute it among Muslims, and of organising a vote jihad against his leadership. Later, he accused the Congress and Muslims of stealing Hindu wealth and property.
Modis inflammatory rhetoric was followed by the BJPs campaign video portraying Muslims as outsiders who plundered Indias wealth. As concerns grew about communal violence, the video was removed. These allegations are a sequel to Modis public referencing of earlier conspiracy theories of love jihad (Muslims forcibly converting Hindu women and marrying them to increase the Muslim population) or land jihad (capturing land to construct religious structures and gaining control of Indias territory). Concerns that his rhetoric might incite further violence against Indian Muslims are increasing. Ordinarily, since Hindus are in a majority in India, it may be difficult to question the rationale of creating a Hindu state. However, two observations are in order. One, the expansionist designs of the cherished Hindu state seek the creation of an Akhand Bharat, a Hindu right fantasy, which would violate the territorial integrity of Nepal, Bangladesh, Pakistan, and Afghanistan, as per a map displayed in the new parliament building. This is not acceptable to the aforementioned independent states. Two, though the creation of a Hindu state should not translate into discrimination against minorities, regrettably this will be the case. The works of French political scientist Christophe Jaffrelot illustrate how Muslims, 14.5 per cent of Indias population, are grossly underrepresented in bureaucracy, the judiciary, police, and legislative organs. They are second-class citizens.
The Muslim-majority area of Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmiri is also being subjected to demographic engineering. The destruction of the centuries-old Babri Masjid by Hindu zealots in 1992 and the construction of a temple in its place has set a precedent that might be followed for other historic mosques. This contrasts sharply with the UAEs gesture of permitting a Hindu temple in Abu Dhabi. Modis anti-Muslim rhetoric is raising concerns of violence. Analysts are also pointing out the fascist tendencies of the BJP regime, a steep decline in democratic values, and a departure from the moorings of pluralism and secularism on which modern India was founded. In her book The Incarcerations, Alpa Shah contends that Modis India is using its national security apparatus to incarcerate ordinary citizens for their dissenting views. Commenting on the book, Arundhati Roy stated that this was about criminalisation and incarceration of dissent itself. Strikingly, the Modi regime has also used art and culture to project the Hindutva philosophy. Kunal Purohits book H-Pop: The Secretive World of Hindutva Pop Stars shows how Hindutva pop stars and influencers are being used to spread the message of Hindu supremacy and create acceptance of Hindutvas core beliefs. Apart from this, Modi is playing on his governments accomplishments: making India the worlds fifth largest economy; the construction of 50,000 kilometres of national highways; boosting Indias military spending; building Vikrant, Indias first domestically built aircraft carrier; and the Chandrayaan-3 moon landing. His prospects of winning a third term have been bolstered by a weak opposition. Despite the formation of the Congress-led 37-party INDIA coalition, there is no real challenge. What has bolstered his outreach is Indias enhanced global standing. In his book Why Bharat Matters, S. Jaishankar presents India as a leader of the global south and makes a case for the rejuvenation of India as a civilisational state.
There are some lessons that Pakistan could learn from Indias electoral process. One, despite the large scale of Indias elections (969 million registered voters; 1m polling stations) and the use of electronic voting machines, election results are largely accepted without much ado. Two, there is no caretaker government, as the incumbents become caretakers in a way, and refrain from announcing major policy decisions or sanctioning expenditure for development schemes. If Modi wins a third term, he is likely to maintain his pro-Hindutva, anti-Muslim, and hegemonic attitude towards regional countries, particularly Pakistan. The write is a former foreign secretary and chairman of Sanober Institute Islamabad. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Who can rock the hybrid boat?
Description : A NUMBER of developments over the past week suggest that the establishment is keen to enforce/ maintain the status quo and the only impediment in its path may be an assertive superior judiciary that has been increasingly finding its feet in recent weeks. If jailed PTI leader and former prime minister Imran Khans article in UKs conservative right-wing Telegraph newspaper blaming the military leadership directly for all his woes the week before was not hint enough of the state of play, two public statements by the latter clarified issues rather unambiguously. The first came in the DG ISPRs press briefing, which was ostensibly called to discuss Afghanistan-based terrorist groups involvement in attacks on Chinese nationals working on development projects in the country. But in response to a couple of questions about the PTI and Imran Khan related to the events of May 9 last year, the DG ISPR stated unequivocally that the only path to rehabilitation for the political party and its leaders was to seek forgiveness for attacking your own forces.
Then, perhaps, talks could happen and that too with political parties (ie, the government), as the military had nothing to do with politics. Imran Khan has been consistent in saying he wouldnt talk to the powerless political parties and that a meaningful dialogue is possible only with the military. The DG ISPR also lamented the delay in the prosecution and sentencing of all those responsible for the May mayhem  including the leaders and mastermind against whom irrefutable evidence has been gathered and submitted  and, in doing so, appeared to hint at the establishments frustrations with what it perceives as roadblocks being erected by the judiciary. The content of the live presser evoked an equally adamant response from the PTI, which went on the offensive, reiterating its stance that May 9 was a false flag operation, accusing the militarys spokesman of being economical with the truth, and saying it would be happy to live with the findings of an impartial judicial commission into the May 9 events and would even apologise if found to be at fault. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. The military spokesman had pre-empted this demand in his briefing earlier by saying if a probe were to happen, as was being demanded, it ought to start with 2014, and not nine years later. The 2014 PTI sit-in in the federal capital was said to have been instigated and backed by the then ISI chief. This was the first indication that the military was prepared to hold its own accountable for past follies, if it paved the way for the trials and sentencing of PTI leaders it says were responsible for the attacks on defence installations in a number of cities in Punjab and KP. While the spokesman left nothing to the imagination, on the first anniversary of May 9, the army chief added his voice to his chief spokesmans in terms of stressing the need for punishing the perpetrators of the violence a year earlier, also lashing out against what he called digital terrorism.
This indicates that harsher curbs on social media are planned. So far, the PTI has had overwhelming social media dominance and had been able to keep a step ahead of its adversaries, but we will find out soon whether it has what it takes to bypass software the Chinese have developed over the years (and Pakistan has reportedly acquired) and successfully used to block dissident content. With this ever-widening gulf between the establishment and the party it once saw as a panacea for all that ails Pakistan, the one thing that many felt could force a rethink in the establishment would have been a public manifestation of the immense support enjoyed by the PTI, as evidenced in last Februarys elections. Many Pakistan watchers keenly waited all day for multitudes of PTI supporters to spill out onto the roads and streets of major urban conurbations on the party leaders call to break the shackles and protest on May 9. But the brutal crackdown of the past one year seems to have knocked the wind out of the partys sails and worn down the workers will. People may turn out to vote for it in droves, but did not appear prepared to risk life, limb and liberty in coming out for mass protests. Some small localised protests did happen, but had zero impact in the sense of influencing decision-making in the corridors of power. Going forward, a couple of factors will play a role in steering developments. The first and foremost will be the confidence the army chief has in his control over his institution. His predecessor appointed a dozen major generals to three stars in his final six weeks in office and left the incumbent little room in terms of forming his own team. Natural attrition and the more dramatic exit of a couple of three stars on disciplinary grounds recently has, 18 months down the line, given the chief an opportunity to place senior officers of his own choosing in key roles which will give him greater freedom of action both inside and outside the institution. The promotion of three officers this week, including the DG ISPR, to three stars was another step in that direction. The military saw May 9 as a coup against the chief, a failed attempt to dislodge him from office. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. With the PTI protests failing to gather momentum, the only impediment in his path seems to be an increasingly assertive superior judiciary. It can and will, in all likelihood, challenge the establishments pre-eminence in decision-making. It isnt clear how the latter plans to deal with that, especially because it believes that a direly needed economic revival is only possible under the umbrella of a hybrid set-up and in a relatively calm political environment. Only the judiciary can rock its boat now. The writer is a former editor of Dawn. abbas.nasir@hotmail.com Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Looming pension crisis cries out for corrective measures
Description : Pension reform is again a hot topic, but this time, bureaucrats will make it appear as if it is intended to benefit top officials. The reforms go beyond just raising the retirement age or taxing pensions. Instead, a series of actions, similar to those that were done in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP), should be seriously considered to reduce the cost of pensions to the government exchequer. The national pension cost will reach nearly Rs2 trillion in FY24, and it is predicted to rise to Rs10tr in the next decade if no reforms are implemented. In 2002-03, the pension cost stood at Rs25 billion, but in a span of just 20 years, it skyrocketed to over Rs1.5tr. Pension reforms have previously been tested in KP and generated the expected cost-saving results. It is high time to rationalise the existing pension programme and transition to more modern schemes available in developing and developed countries. Last week, Finance Minister Muhammad Aurangzeb proposed to raise the retirement age from 60 to 65 years. It has sparked controversy over whether the government intends to benefit only a select few individuals. This decision has both advantages and disadvantages. In KP, the age restriction was raised to 63 years in 2019 with a projected annual savings of Rs20bn. However, the decision was reversed due to strong protest from bureaucrats, and the court also overturned the decision. However, KPs other pension reforms remained in effect. KP Advisor on Finance Muzzammil Aslam has a different take on raising the age restriction than his predecessor, who implemented a series of reforms. Mr Aslam believes that the lump sum payment of pension payments will be delayed for the next five years, providing some breathing room for the time being. This will allow the government to show a lower budget deficit. The net impact will increase when the five-year allowances are added to the basic salary, which will be used to pay the pension. The age extension will postpone payments, but total payouts to employees will climb over the following five years. While these efforts provide some relief in the short term, crucial steps must be implemented to address the increasing pension liabilities. The governments liabilities have jumped from Rs25bn in FY03 to Rs2tr in FY24 There is another idea to tax pensions. It may also face political challenges. However, the KP government has imposed a 5pc pension tax on grades 17 and above on their executive allowance. It is estimated that this measure alone will generate Rs150bn in contributions to a pay-as-you-go pension system. This was not an easy decision, but it was made in KP to obtain some contribution from existing employees. The federal government can look into this step in response to opposition to taxing pensions. KP reforms In 2004, based on recommendations from a World Bank project, the India implemented a national pension scheme wherein employee contributions are matched by the government. Pakistan did not choose to adopt it since it was not anticipated that the cost would rise so dramatically over the next 20 years. Taimur Khan Jhagra, former finance minister of KP, took the lead in implementing a series of pension reforms, including the introduction of a contributory pension scheme for new employees beginning July 1, 2022. Few substantial changes were made to the existing pension programme. A well-known 13-tier pension system was in place, covering the pensioners widow, children, parents, siblings, sisters, and grandchildren. KP confined it to direct dependents. The federal government did the same last year, but other provinces have not followed suit. The previous PTI government raised KP and Punjabs minimum retirement age to 55 from 45, reducing KPs pension bill by Rs20bn alone. KP consolidated various pensions into a single one. Previously, individuals could receive two pensions simultaneously, with an active employee receiving both a salary and a pension. The major reform is the implementation of a contributing pension scheme for new employees. Under this programme, the KP government contributes 12pc and employees contribute 10pc. So far, 40,000 staff have been hired under this system starting July 1, 2022. There are additional critical reforms that the KP and federal governments should implement, such as revisiting the single Universal Pay Scale between Grades 1 and 22. Pay in provinces is decoupled from the Centre and between departments, allowing each department to develop a pay scale appropriate for their budget and the market value of their professions. Pension reforms are greatly needed. The question is whether the state will be able to sustain pension payments for the next 10 to 15 years. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : SMOKERS CORNER: KHAN AND THE GENERALS
Description : In May 2023, a recorded phone call  allegedly between the mother-in-law of the former Chief Justice of Pakistan (CJP) Umar Atta Bandial, and the wife of a lawyer-member of Imran Khans populist Pakistan Tehreek-i-Insaf (PTI)  was leaked on social media. In the call, the two ladies can be heard criticising the coalition government made up of the parties that had ousted Khans regime in April 2022 through an act of parliament. At one point in the leaked conversation, the mother-in-law laments, Yeh kambakht martial law bhi tau nahin lagaatay! [These cursed people dont even impose martial law!] Bykambakht,she meant the military establishment (ME). The conversation was surreal on many levels. Khan had been the blue-eyed boy of the ME, until he had a falling out with his makers. From 2011 till he was elected as prime minister in 2018, the ME had successfully shaped Khans political rise in a highly coordinated manner. His popularity was first established within the rank and file of the military. Then, some TV journalists were brought on board, followed by the induction of some vital members of the judiciary.
This troika  the ME, the electronic media and the judiciary  was complimented by the trained social media wing of Khans PTI to proliferate narratives pitched against the two older mainstream parties, the Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) and the Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP). The two were deeply demonised as being corrupt. After his ouster, Imran Khan was convinced that the establishment had betrayed him, and the May 9-10 protests last year were an attempt to rally support amongst pro-Khan factions in the military. However, any military intervention was drastically overestimated by his supporters A constituency that had initially been built by the former military dictator Gen Pervez Musharraf, and which mostly consisted of middle-class and upper-middle-class Pakistanis, was navigated by the ME and the media in such a manner that it eventually fell in Khans lap. This became a quadrilateral elite, comprising the ME, the media, the judiciary and the middle classes. After Khans ouster in April 2022, he began to publicly lambast the ME, accusing it of betraying him. But the truth is, due to the many abject failures of Khans government, the ME had begun to gradually distance itself from him months before he was ousted. In February 2022, Bandial became the CJP. He was cut from the same cloth that at least four of his predecessors were. These included Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry and, even more so, Justice Saqib Nasir, Justice Asif Khosa and Justice Gulzar Ahmad. Anti-PTI parties often accused them of being overtly pro-Khan. Justice Bandial was accused of having a soft corner for Khan. Truth is, Bandial wasnt very good at hiding this soft corner. Now the question is, during the time of the aforementioned phone call leak, when Khan was holding angry rallies and condemning the ME, why was Bandials mother-in-law yearning for a military takeover? Equally surreal was the presence of banners in some pro-Khan rallies with We Want Martial Law written on them. Also, why did the PTI  by planning last years violent riots on May 9 and 10, in which PTI supporters and members attacked military property  believe that this would cause a split in the armed forces and bring pro-Khan generals to power? Many academics who study coups are of the view that, if the conditions allow, street protests can be followed by a coup detat. According to the political scientist Scott A Tyson, protests are often a signal to the elites to intervene.
The elites in this context are the military and political elites. These may also include the higher judiciary and business elites. A regime facing the protests, too, is made up of political elites. Once the anti-regime elites decide that the protests are clearly signalling for an intervention, this is then communicated to the state elites. The media too plays a role in this. Its reporting of the protests may strengthen the signal and galvanise the military to intervene. The mother-in-laws kambakht lament was expressing a desperate yearning within sections of economic elites for military intervention. This nature of signalling was loud and clear on numerous WhatsApp groups when Khan was holding rallies against his ouster. The signal became even more obvious when the We Want Martial Law banners began to appear at the rallies. Some media personnel also started enhancing the signal to the ME. But by late 2022, the MEs top leadership had changed. A general who had earlier exited the project that was set up to facilitate Khans rise became the new army chief. Yet, PTI believed that many remnants of the project were still active within the military. I believe that with the judiciary still in facilitation mode, the notion of causing a split within the military to replace the new military chief with pro-Khan generals was the brainwave of some retired military men who were well-versed in the theories of post-protest coups. Once the signal to intervene in Khans post-ouster rallies was ignored by the new ME, a violent uprising was conceived that was to target the new ME. The uprising was enacted to evoke the concerns of the supposed pro-Khan generals. The signal now was: eject the new army chief and intervene (on the side of Khan) to avoid an all-out civil war. This plan could not have been formulated without the input of some retired officers. Many of them had been quite vocal in their support for Khan.
The violent May 9 and 10 protests were orchestrated by a political elite (PTI) against another set of elites (the coalition government) to signal the need for an intervention to judicial and military elites. But, according to Tyson, whether or not a coup will succeed is generally not certain to elites. This uncertainty is caused by the uncertainty regarding the actions of other elites. The other elite, in the context of the May 9 and 10 riots, was the military. An intervention by pro-Khan officers was drastically overestimated by the planners and the plan collapsed. The coalition government was able to withstand the assault. The new military chief began to swiftly oust the remaining pro-Khan elements from the military  even though those remaining in the judiciary are now trying to avoid suffering a similar fate through a pushback in the name of the independence of the judiciary.This, too, is quite surreal. Published in Dawn, EOS, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : A turbulent 2023
Description : PAKISTAN faced a tumultuous year in 2023 marked by severe economic distress and a sharp erosion of civil liberties. As documented in the HRCPs annual report, the year was nothing short of a human rights crisis on multiple fronts. Economic hardship was pervasive, with back-breaking inflation  nearly 40pc  and low growth hitting the common citizen the hardest. Protests were widespread, ranging from government employees striking against delayed salaries and pension issues to political demonstrations demanding timely elections. The state responded with indifference and sometimes outright violence, underlining its disregard for the peoples constitutional rights. The political arena was no less strained: the year saw unprecedented violence following the arrest of former prime minister Imran Khan; subsequent PTI-led riots were met with harsh government crackdowns. This included mass arrests and the controversial use of military courts for civilian trials. Political dissent was stifled and freedom of speech curtailed with internet shutdowns and media gags on reporting of certain political leaders. Sadly, the governments management of the turmoil involved significant overreach, impacting judicial independence and skewing the electoral landscape. The swift passage of laws granting sweeping powers to intelligence agencies and restricting media freedoms points to the governments alarming propensity to consolidate power at the cost of transparency and accountability.
Human rights violations were not limited to political suppression. The report highlights severe abuses such as enforced disappearances, alleged extrajudicial killings and custodial torture by state agencies. The societal impact of these policies and actions has been devastating. Moreover, marginalised communities, including women, children, religious minorities, and transgender persons, faced increased violence and discrimination. Notable too was the harsh crackdown on peaceful assemblies like the Baloch Yakjehti Councils protests. On the international front, despite engaging with global human rights mechanisms, Pakistans selective adherence to recommendations concerning enforced disappearances and the use of the death penalty reflected a reluctance to fully align with international human rights standards. Rulers would do well to remember that adhering to those standards will help maintain Pakistans desperately needed GSP-Plus status and be a more inviting place for foreign investment.
As the year proceeds, it is imperative for the state to reconsider its approach to human rights. The government must ensure the independence of the judiciary, respect for democratic processes, and protection for all citizens against the abuse of power. Laws that infringe on freedom of expression and assembly should be reviewed and reformed. Additionally, there should be a concerted effort to address the economic inequalities that underpin much of the social unrest. For a stable and prosperous Pakistan, human rights must be more than an ideal; they must be an integral part of governance and everyday life. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Love knows no boundaries at Karachis Edhi Home nursery for special children
Description : KARACHI: Its one day to Mothers Day and the childrens nursery at the Edhi Home in Mithadar is decorated with balloons and posters along with framed photographs of the late couple Abdul Sattar Edhi and Bilquis Edhi. Children in the classrooms are busy making greeting cards, drawing pictures of themselves and the only woman whom they have come to know as their mother, their Chhoti (younger) Mummy Sabah Faisal Edhi. The duties of the busy mother of so many children, including four of her own, starts from early morning. After tending to her own household duties and sending off her youngest, Moosa Edhi, to school, she is in the nursery at 8am sharp, inquiring from the staff there if everyone had a good sleep, if anyone had any issues during the night. It has become a habit with her to visit the nursery first to inquire about her babies before getting to her other work of calling up the other Edhi Homes and Centres, asking about the other children, their health and school progress, asking about the women in their Homes, tending to the marriage proposals, and adoption procedures and planning outings and picnics for the children. When parents discover their babies are not well, they quietly leave them in our cot, says Sabah Edhi as country celebrates Mothers Day today But today, before she can go inside the nursery, she stops in the playroom to admire three-year-old Fatimas greeting her with a broad smile and a happy dance. Chhoti Mummy hugs the child and gestures to know if she has eaten breakfast. Fatima is deaf and mute. She has only recently been fitted with a cochlear implant, which has enabled her to hear and appreciate music to which she loves to dance. It is quite obvious that Sabahs favourite in the nursery is five-year-old Moosa, named by Mummy, Bilquis Edhi, herself, after her own youngest grandson, Sabah and Faisals youngest son Moosa. But this Moosa, even though he is five, doesnt look more than a year old. His growth is stunted. Sabah lifts him out of his cot and cuddles him lovingly. The nursery only has special children or children with learning disabilities. Moosa was the last child here named by Bilquis Edhi. The rest have been given names by their Chhoti Mummy. There are two newborn baby girls, Aimen and Noor Fatima, peacefully sleeping in their cradles in the cheerful blue nursery. Both the babies are blind. The moment some parents discover that all is not well with their babies they quietly leave them in our cot, says Sabah. They never return for them, she sighs. Parents of very sick children, too, disown them even when they know that their child doesnt have much time to live. We take them in, find them the best of medical care till the last of their breath, she adds. On discovering a child in the cot, we first try to get information about who left him or her there followed by a thorough medical check-up. If they are in need of medical care, we make sure that they receive the best that there is. Just the other day, someone left a little girl suffering from diarrhoea. She had to be hospitalised, she informs. Just then one little girl, of about four years of age, who also looks like she is considerably attached to her Chhoti Mummy walks in and runs up to her. She is normal. There is nothing wrong with this one, Sabah says. She says her name is Manahil. We found her near Sohrab Goth. Most of the children in our Sohrab Goth Centre are much older so I brought her here with me until we can find her parents, she informs. By the grace of God, there is no shortage of space, love and care in this Home built for these children by Edhi Sahab and Mummy, she says, kissing the childs head. All children are a blessing, a priceless gift from God. I wish the parents who discard their children like or neglect them would realise this. I wish such parents could love their special, disabled or sick children like they love their normal children, she says. Sometimes, these very children who they love so much because they are normal and healthy grow up to discard their parents when they are old and weak. Thats the story of so many old people in our homes, she concludes. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Documentary on Dr Aafia Siddiqui launched in Karachi
Description : KARACHI: Aafia Siddiqui  The True Story, a documentary by Friends of Aafia, was launched here at the Karachi Press Club (KPC) on Saturday. The documentary shed light on various aspects of the life of Dr Aafia from her birth, education, marriage and to her kidnapping in Karachi and confinement in a notorious US prison.
View this post on Instagram
Aafias sister Dr Fowzia Siddiqui and Muslim Matters Editor-in-chief Hena Zuberi and others spoke at the event. Dr Fowzia said that her sister Dr Aafia was a gifted child, a bright scholar and a loving and caring person. She got a PhD degree in neurosciences from Brandies University of the US and it was her dream to revolutionise education system in Pakistan. In the documentary, human rights lawyer Clive Stafford Smith, who currently represents Dr Aafia, said a vast majority of the American people had no idea who Dr Aafia was and they also did not care.
He said that she has suffered a lot in the US prison and braved all sorts of torture. El-Hajj Mauri Saalakhan, the founding president and director of operations at The Aafia Foundation, told the documentary makers that after 9/11, the US targeted the human rights and liberties of people, especially Muslims. He said Dr Aafia also fell prey to this victimisation and in 2003 she was kidnapped, along with her children, in Karachi and got disappeared on mere suspicion that her husband had bought online night vision goggles. Umme Muhammad, the president of the Musawemem Campaign, said for the last 15 years she had been linked to the case of Dr Aafia but disappointingly nothing more could be achieved.
She said Dr Aafia was targeted only because she was Muslim. Yvonne Ridley was amongst the first investigative journalists who told the world that Dr Aafia was jailed in Afghanistan. Talking about the grey lady prisoner of Bigram jail, she said in those times the US administration would dehumanise the prisoners and the same was done to Dr Aafia. She was wounded by the US soldiers and in injured condition she was brought to the US and tried by a court in a highly biased manner and jailed for long 86 years, which means the rest of her life. Zeina El-Debis, leader of the Friends of Aafia and founder of the Shade of Mercy Foundation, talked about their efforts to get Dr Aafia repatriated on humanitarian grounds. She said the documentary was also a part of such efforts. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Situationer: Riverine region in the crosshairs of militia violence
Description : DESPITE a year-long anti-dacoit operation in upper Sindhs riverine area, the dacoit factor remains an enigma for the provincial police. The situation took a new turn on May 5 when the Bugtis, allegedly backed by the Punjab police and equipped with military-grade weapons, infiltrated the riverine area of Rwanti in Ghotki, which lies on the Sindh-Punjab border, adding a new layer of complexity to the ongoing operation. The recent incident has once again laid bare the seeming helplessness of the Sindh police, sparking outrage among the provinces intelligentsia. The scourge of dacoits has long plagued parts of northern Sindh, with the governments efforts to eradicate them yielding little success. Despite continued endeavours to tackle the issue, the desired results remain elusive. The Kalpar Bugtis, led by their chief Jalal Kalpar Bugti, claimed to have exacted revenge for the murder of his 30-year-old son, Abdul Rehman Kalpar, by killing two prominent dacoits from the Shar community and injuring half a dozen others. The incident occurred in the Machhko police station area, which falls under the jurisdiction of the Punjab police. The dacoits killed were identified as Alim alias Almo Shar, brother of Sanu Shar, and Hakim alias Haku Shar. Rehman Kalpar was ambushed and killed by dacoits on Feb 13 while he was travelling on the CPEC road in Ghotki district. Jalal Kalpar reached out to the Sindh police, seeking their assistance in avenging his sons murder, according to a senior police officer familiar with the situation. Dacoit issue remains an enigma for Sindh police Jalal Kalpar is unapologetic and straightforward in justifying his actions. I repeatedly reached out to the Ghotki police, but they ignored me. I went to perform Umrah, and upon my return, I was approached by the Punjab police to liaise with them and see how things work, he told Dawn over phone from Sui in Balochistan.
Jalal alleged that Ghotki police SSP Anwar Khetran made excuses, claiming that his force was outgunned by the dacoits, as they only had G-3 and Kalashnikov rifles. However, he added, Mr Khetran did acknowledge that geo-fencing evidence had confirmed the involvement of the Shar community in his sons murder. Punjab police sought help from me in terms of human resource and police would lead the offensive. My men were there as a cover. Finally, Shars were killed in Machko police limits of Punjab. Sindh police didnt do anything in this offence, Jalal alleged. Jalal Kalpar hails from those Bugti families who defied the late Nawab Akbar Bugti and were subsequently displaced from Dera Bugti, settling in Sindh. Following Rehmans killing, Jalal declared at a jirga in Sui that he would hold accountable those responsible, specifically targeting Shaharyar Shar, the chieftain of the Shar clan and a former PTI leader who later joined PPP. In an attempt to defuse the situation, Shar reached out to Jalal to clarify his position and maintain neutrality. Jalal conveyed message to Shaharyar that if Abid Hussain Jatoi, Abid Sundrani, or Gul Mohammad Jakhrani stand surety for him, only then will he talk to him. Only Gul Mohammad agreed, and he, along with Shaharyar, met Kalpar at his Sukkur residence, but names of Rahib Khan Shar and Sana Shar emerged as those responsible for Rehmans murder, a police officer said. Police post as Bugtis base A former SSP of Ghotki said that before the May 5 incident, Bugtis had started arriving in areas along the Sindh-Punjab border. They [Bugtis] wanted Bhaya-4 police post vacated by Sindh police. This post is manned by Ghotki police, but the area falls in Punjabs territorial limits. As they wanted to use this post as their operational base, but didnt find Ghotki police forthcoming in their response, so they turned to Punjab police eventually, said the officer. According to him, the Punjab police permitted the Bugtis to utilise the Camp-2 location, which was situated approximately 800 metres from Sanu Shars hideout. Its an ideal location from which they can confront the Shars comfortably, the officer added. Viral video images revealed that the Bugtis, armed with prohibited and military-grade weapons, disembarked from APCs in the katcha area. The ensuing gun battle, which lasted a couple of days, resulted in the deaths of two Shars and injuries to several others. The Bugtis then departed. According to a former SSP of Shikarpur, the military-grade weapons used were of 82mm dimension, a type commonly seen in Afghanistan. Dangerous precedent Professor Inam Shaikh, an analyst, says, The incident has set a dangerous precedent. He urges the Supreme Court to take suo motu notice. How can state collaborate with private persons? It amounts to creating private militia which otherwise means civil war. Supreme Court must step in to take action against police authorities and criminals for this illegal act, he insists. Naseer Memon, a writer, has analysed the situation from the perspective of good dacoits, bad dacoits and the economy of the katcha area. The recent episode of allowing one tribe to attack another in the katcha area can snowball this crime into a tribal warfare. This can flare up a bloodbath, he says. He believes that a multi-stakeholder economy, operating behind the scenes, drives the dacoits, kidnapping, and ransom industry in upper Sindh. A police official reveals that Rahib Shar has been primarily responsible for the kidnapping of people on the CPEC road and other areas. Meanwhile, Sanu Shar has been running a honey trap industry in the riverine area. According to another police officer, Rahib Shar is residing in Sindhs riverine area, while Sanu Shar is based in Punjabs limits. Actually, there is a strip of riverine land stretching over around 3-4km that falls in Sindh but administratively looked after by Rahim Yar Khan administration. Since Punjab police dont pay heed to this area much and Sindh police also remain inactive, it has become a sort of no mans land and a safe haven for outlaws, claims an SSP from lower Sindh. Bugtis aim to target Shars as a community, while the actual culprits, Rahib Shar and Sanu Shar, remain out of their reach. After the July 28, 2023, killing of notorious dacoits Janu Indher, Soomar Shar, Shahzado Dashti, Nazar Mohammad alias Nazroo alias Kato Shar, and Mubashir alias Mushir Indhar, the Sindh police chief was initially reluctant to take a position. However, the Sindh police later claimed credit for the operation. Meanwhile, the Punjab police also staked their claim. Nevertheless, the Sindh police asserted their right to the head money of Rs8.5 million fixed by the government against Janu, Soomar, and Shahzado. After the Bugtis onslaught on the Shars, Sanu Shar uploaded a video clarifying that he was not involved in Rehmans murder. However, this failed to appease Jalal Kalpar, who has temporarily withdrawn from the area but remains resolute in his vow to take on the Shars until Rehmans murderers are killed. I have no issues with Sindh or the Sindhi people, nor did I have any enmity with the Shars as a community. It is the Ganderi Shars, specifically Sannu, Moriyo, Jamal, and Rahib, who are responsible for my sons murder. So, my quest for vengeance is far from over, he declared. Despite repeated messages and calls, Ghotki SSP Sumair Noor Channa remained unavailable to explain whether criminal cases have been lodged in this regard. Similarly, Rahim Yar Khan SSP Rizwan Gondal did not reply to questions about how Punjab police are backing private militias to take on outlaws. A message was also sent to Sindh IG Ghulam Nabi Memon to get his side of the story, but no contact could be established with him. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Pakistans iCube-Qamar beams back first images from moons orbit
Description : Pakistans inaugural lunar satellite iCube-Qamar on Friday transmitted the first-ever images captured by it from the lunar orbit, the national space agency said. The satellite, part of Chinas Change-6 lunar mission, was launched from the Hainan province on May 3 and had successfully entered the moons orbit at 1:14pm on May 8. The moon is at an average distance of 384,400km from earth. The lunar module was designed by Islamabads Institute of Space Technology (IST) in collaboration with Chinas Shanghai University (SJTU) and Pakistans national space agency Suparco. The landmark images were unveiled at a ceremony organised at the China National Space Agency (CNSA) to mark the successful mission accomplishment, IST spokesperson and head of Department of Electrical and Computer Science, Dr Khurram Khursheed told Dawn.com. They were officially handed over to Pakistans ambassador to Beijing, she added.
View this post on Instagram
One of the first-ever images captured by Pakistans inaugural lunar satellite iCube-Qamar shows the moon and the sun.   Suparco/CNSA
The iCube-Q orbiter carries two optical cameras to image the lunar surface. The module is a cube satellite or cubesat  miniature satellites typically characterised by their small size and standardized cubic design. Due to their compact size and relatively low cost compared to traditional satellites, CubeSats offered opportunities for universities, research institutions and commercial entities to participate in space missions and gather valuable data for scientific advancement and innovation. Operating in extreme temperatures as low as minus 100 degrees Celsius, the satellite features a 7-kilogramme one-megapixel camera tailored for missions with power constraints.
Dr Khursheed had said the satellite would play a critical role in deep space missions. Its surface-level analysis capabilities, transmitting images at a modest 1-kbps, will provide crucial data on crater locations, water, and traces of ice on the moons surface, he had said. As the Chinese lander collects rock and soil samples, iCube-Q will spend three to six months orbiting the moon, capturing and transmitting images of the moon back to Earth. The IST said the opportunity to release the cubesat in lunar orbit from the Change-6 mission was offered by the CNSA through the Asia Pacific Space Cooperation Organisation (Apsco). After a thorough evaluation, Pakistans proposal was accepted out of all Apsco member states.
One of the first-ever images captured by Pakistans inaugural lunar satellite iCube-Qamar shows the sun shining brightly.   Suparco/CNSA
The Change-6 mission, which aims to explore the moons dark side, employs lunar research payloads from multiple countries, including Pakistans iCube-Qamar satellite. The mission is named after the mythical Chinese moon goddess. Nasa is banned by US law from any collaboration, direct or indirect, with China. On Change-6, China is carrying payloads from France, Italy, Sweden and Pakistan, while Change-7 will bear payloads from Russia, Switzerland and Thailand when it launches in 2026.
Change-6 aims to collect around 2kg of lunar samples from the far side of the Moon and bring them back to Earth for analysis. Chinese state news agency Xinhua had hailed it as the first endeavour of its kind in the history of human lunar exploration. China will send a robotic spacecraft in the coming days on a round trip to the moons far side in the first of three technically demanding missions that will pave the way for an inaugural Chinese crewed landing and a base on the lunar south pole. The probe is set to land in the immense South Pole-Aitken Basin, one of the largest known impact craters in the solar system. Once there, it will scoop up lunar soil and rocks, and carry out other experiments in the landing zone. With no direct line of sight with the Earth, Change-6 must rely on a recently deployed relay satellite orbiting the moon during its 53-day mission, including a never-before-attempted ascent from the moons hidden side on its return journey home. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : PIA staff forgets to put boys body on plane
Description :
SKARDU: Officials of PIA, the Civil Aviation Authority and police try to placate the protesting father of the deceased.Photo by the writer
GILGIT: In a heart-wrenching incident, a PIA flight from Islamabad to Skardu left behind the body of a six-year-old boy at the capitals airport on Friday, while his parents continued their journey, unaware of the shocking mistake. The parents of the deceased boy were shocked and fainted at Skardu airport when they came to know that their sons body had been left behind in Islamabad. Mujtaba, a resident of Katshi village of Kharmang district, was diagnosed with a tumour at a hospital in Skardu and doctors referred him to Rawalpindi for treatment a month ago. His father Muhammad Askari and mother took him to Rawalpindi and he had been under treatment at Benazir Bhutto Hospital for weeks. Mujtaba lost his life in the hospital on Thursday. The parents decided to transport the body of their child to their native village of Katshi for burial, through a PIA flight on Friday, as a 24-hour-long journey from Islamabad to Skardu by road with the body was not possible due to hot weather. Shocked parents, relatives protest against airline managements negligence at Skardu airport The deceased boys parents and another relative confirmed their tickets at flight PK-451 from Islamabad to Skardu on Friday morning. They brought the body to Islamabad airport at 6am and completed cargo procedure for the body after fulfilling SOPs and airlines rules and made the payment. Ibrahim Asadi, a relative of the deceased boy, told Dawn that the body was scheduled to be transported with the parents to Skardu from Islamabad at 9am. He said the flight was delayed for four hours and left Islamabad at 1pm. Upon arrival at Skardu airport at 2pm, the parents were informed that mistakenly the body was not loaded on the plane and left behind at Islamabad airport. The news sparked grief and outrage as parents were shocked and started crying while the boys mother and father fainted at the airport. The relatives of the boy waiting to receive the body also gathered at the airports lounge and started protest against the PIA managements negligence. It continued for three hours. Officials of PIA, Civil Aviation Authority and other departments, who were on duty at Skardu airport, tried to calm down the boys parents and relatives and admitted their mistake. They assured the parents of bringing back the body on Saturday (today). The PIA officials said the company, which handles cargos at the airport, is responsible for not loading the body and assured the parents that action would be taken against it for negligence. The boys parents and relatives chanted slogans against the PIA administration. They said the poor family had paid higher price to transport the body through the PIA flight, but the airline committed a serious negligence. They appealed to the government to take action against those responsible for the negligence. Yousaf Kamal, another relative of the deceased boy, said the body had deliberately not been loaded on the plane. He said Minister for Kashmir Affairs and Gilgit-Baltistan Engr Amir Muqam was scheduled to fly to Gilgit from Islamabad on Friday, adding that the PIA flight from Islamabad to Gilgit couldnt operate due to the bad weather condition. He said the federal minister had changed his plan and decided to go to Skardu and kept the passengers waiting. He said the flight was scheduled to depart from Islamabad at 9am, but was delayed till 1pm to accommodate the minister, leaving the body behind at the airport. Published in Dawn, May 11th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Downside risks for Pakistan remain exceptionally high: IMF
Description : Downside risks for the economy remain exceptionally high, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) said on Friday in its staff report ahead of the governments talks with the fund on a longer term progamme. An IMF mission is expected to visit the country this month to discuss a new programme, ahead of the government beginning its annual budget-making process for the next financial year. Downside risks remain exceptionally high. While the new government has indicated its intention to continue the SBAs (standby arrangement) policies, political uncertainty remains significant, said the fund in its staff report following the second and final review under the SBA.
The fund added that political complexities and high cost of living could weigh on policy, adding that policy slippages, together with lower external financing, could undermine the narrow path to debt sustainability and place pressure on the exchange rate. The IMF also said higher commodity prices and disruptions to shipping, or tighter global financial conditions, would also adversely affect external stability for the cash-strapped nation. The fund stressed the need for timely post-programme external financing disbursements.
Last month, the country completed a short-term $3 billion programme, which helped stave off sovereign default, but Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif has stressed the need for a fresh, longer term programme. Pakistan narrowly averted default last summer and the economy has stabilised after the completion of the last IMF programme with inflation coming down to around 17 per cent in April from a record high 38pc last May. The country is still dealing with a high fiscal shortfall and while the external account deficit has been controlled through import control mechanisms, it has come at the expense of stagnating growth, which is expected to be around 2pc this year compared to negative growth last year. Pakistan is expected to seek at least $6bn and request additional financing from the Fund under the Resilience and Sustainability Trust. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Who can rock the hybrid boat?
Description : A NUMBER of developments over the past week suggest that the establishment is keen to enforce/ maintain the status quo and the only impediment in its path may be an assertive superior judiciary that has been increasingly finding its feet in recent weeks. If jailed PTI leader and former prime minister Imran Khans article in UKs conservative right-wing Telegraph newspaper blaming the military leadership directly for all his woes the week before was not hint enough of the state of play, two public statements by the latter clarified issues rather unambiguously. The first came in the DG ISPRs press briefing, which was ostensibly called to discuss Afghanistan-based terrorist groups involvement in attacks on Chinese nationals working on development projects in the country. But in response to a couple of questions about the PTI and Imran Khan related to the events of May 9 last year, the DG ISPR stated unequivocally that the only path to rehabilitation for the political party and its leaders was to seek forgiveness for attacking your own forces.
Then, perhaps, talks could happen and that too with political parties (ie, the government), as the military had nothing to do with politics. Imran Khan has been consistent in saying he wouldnt talk to the powerless political parties and that a meaningful dialogue is possible only with the military. The DG ISPR also lamented the delay in the prosecution and sentencing of all those responsible for the May mayhem  including the leaders and mastermind against whom irrefutable evidence has been gathered and submitted  and, in doing so, appeared to hint at the establishments frustrations with what it perceives as roadblocks being erected by the judiciary. The content of the live presser evoked an equally adamant response from the PTI, which went on the offensive, reiterating its stance that May 9 was a false flag operation, accusing the militarys spokesman of being economical with the truth, and saying it would be happy to live with the findings of an impartial judicial commission into the May 9 events and would even apologise if found to be at fault. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. The military spokesman had pre-empted this demand in his briefing earlier by saying if a probe were to happen, as was being demanded, it ought to start with 2014, and not nine years later. The 2014 PTI sit-in in the federal capital was said to have been instigated and backed by the then ISI chief. This was the first indication that the military was prepared to hold its own accountable for past follies, if it paved the way for the trials and sentencing of PTI leaders it says were responsible for the attacks on defence installations in a number of cities in Punjab and KP. While the spokesman left nothing to the imagination, on the first anniversary of May 9, the army chief added his voice to his chief spokesmans in terms of stressing the need for punishing the perpetrators of the violence a year earlier, also lashing out against what he called digital terrorism.
This indicates that harsher curbs on social media are planned. So far, the PTI has had overwhelming social media dominance and had been able to keep a step ahead of its adversaries, but we will find out soon whether it has what it takes to bypass software the Chinese have developed over the years (and Pakistan has reportedly acquired) and successfully used to block dissident content. With this ever-widening gulf between the establishment and the party it once saw as a panacea for all that ails Pakistan, the one thing that many felt could force a rethink in the establishment would have been a public manifestation of the immense support enjoyed by the PTI, as evidenced in last Februarys elections. Many Pakistan watchers keenly waited all day for multitudes of PTI supporters to spill out onto the roads and streets of major urban conurbations on the party leaders call to break the shackles and protest on May 9. But the brutal crackdown of the past one year seems to have knocked the wind out of the partys sails and worn down the workers will. People may turn out to vote for it in droves, but did not appear prepared to risk life, limb and liberty in coming out for mass protests. Some small localised protests did happen, but had zero impact in the sense of influencing decision-making in the corridors of power. Going forward, a couple of factors will play a role in steering developments. The first and foremost will be the confidence the army chief has in his control over his institution. His predecessor appointed a dozen major generals to three stars in his final six weeks in office and left the incumbent little room in terms of forming his own team. Natural attrition and the more dramatic exit of a couple of three stars on disciplinary grounds recently has, 18 months down the line, given the chief an opportunity to place senior officers of his own choosing in key roles which will give him greater freedom of action both inside and outside the institution. The promotion of three officers this week, including the DG ISPR, to three stars was another step in that direction. The military saw May 9 as a coup against the chief, a failed attempt to dislodge him from office. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. With the PTI protests failing to gather momentum, the only impediment in his path seems to be an increasingly assertive superior judiciary. It can and will, in all likelihood, challenge the establishments pre-eminence in decision-making. It isnt clear how the latter plans to deal with that, especially because it believes that a direly needed economic revival is only possible under the umbrella of a hybrid set-up and in a relatively calm political environment. Only the judiciary can rock its boat now. The writer is a former editor of Dawn. abbas.nasir@hotmail.com Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Insurgency and social change
Description : THE recent killing of seven barbershop workers from Punjab in Gwadar is another indicator that the insurgency in Balochistan is evolving and intensifying demographic changes, which will impact the sociopolitical landscape of the province. Although targeted killings of settlers in Balochistan are not a new trend, the emergence of the Balochistan Liberation Army as the primary insurgent group has significantly increased operational capacities and diversified targets.
While the BLA has not officially claimed responsibility for the Gwadar attack, it is likely the act of one of its wings or affiliate groups. Last month, the group carried out a significant attack, killing nine people from central Punjab who were planning on reaching Europe through Iran. Based on their ethnicity, BLA gunmen abducted them from a bus bound for Taftan and later dumped their bodies under a bridge in a hilly area of Noshki. In a similar attack, possibly by the same gunmen, two people were killed when they tried to escape the assailants cordon on N-40, the Quetta-Noshki highway. Following the Noshki attack, the BLA issued a statement claiming that its special squad had killed agents of Pakistans intelligence agencies who, they claimed, were travelling in plain clothes on the bus. However, media reports and investigations later revealed that the victims were using the Balochistan route to travel to Iran and onward to Europe. Baloch militants view workers and travellers from Punjab as collaborators or agents of security forces or the federal government. Attacks targeting Punjabi workers and settlers have occurred in various parts of the province in the past. It appears that the insurgents kill settlers because they are non-combatants and, as such, easy targets. Militant groups assign such tasks to their new recruits to test their conviction and draw them into the cycle of violence. While one can comprehend Baloch grievances against the state institutions and Punjab, it is also crucial to understand why they target non-combatants who have been serving them for years. Whenever anger flares against the states flawed policies, settlers become the targets. Traditionally, Baloch society has a few key professions. Hairdressing is one of the major ones they miss. Teaching comes next, with teachers from Punjab and the Urdu-speaking community making significant contributions to the education sector in the province. Like tribal codes in other parts of the country, the Baloch follow the tradition of hosting members of different ethnicities without integrating them into their tribal ethics. This is a common practice, as assimilation is a long process. The same applies to settlers from Punjab and urban Sindh, who have embraced the norms of Baloch society, while maintaining ties with their native towns and communities.
However, Punjabis constitute the largest ethnic group in the country and wield significant power and resources, leading to resentment not only among the Baloch, but also Pakhtuns and Sindhis. Whenever anger flares against the establishment and the states flawed policies, settlers become the targets of this animosity. Historically, barbers have been the first victims when such hatred triggers violence. It is worth noting that many of these barbers hail from southern Punjab, much of which identifies itself as Baloch, but their official domicile determines their identity and ethnicity. Over the last two decades, Pakhtuns have captured market businesses in urban Balochistan, while Sindhis have gradually become prominent in the labour market. Despite issues of ethnic and tribal pride and sociocultural differences, there has been no hostility towards these communities. This is because both ethnicities are part of Balochistan and share some cultural commonalities. Moreover, both communities have faced major hostility, apart from minor issues related to ethnic and tribal pride and sociocultural differences. The reasons are that both ethnicities are part of Balochistan and share few other cultural commonalities, but both are also seen as deprived communities and, in the past, have remained part of the political struggle for rights. Insurgencies have no room for neutrality or ambiguity, as insurgents seek clear distinctions between friends and foes. In places like Myanmar and India, ethnic insurgents target civilians from minority ethnic groups, as well as engage in property destruction and other abuses. While small ethnic groups may strive to maintain a neutral stance, they often find themselves between insurgents and counterinsurgents in grey areas. This dynamic is evident among Pakhtuns and Sindhis, who have been targeted by insurgents while working on government projects. The contractors had hired them as an alternative to Punjabi labour, but they were not spared despite a sense of affinity with them.
Sociopolitical transformation is a complex phenomenon, which is influenced not only by insurgents but also by internal societal changes. Baloch society is transforming due to rural-to-urban migration, increasing literacy rates, and improved connectivity. Similar to Karachis experience, urbanisation in Quetta is making other major urban centres multi-ethnic too. Despite ethnic bonds with Sindhis, coexistence with Pakhtuns and Sindhis may face occasional challenges. Additionally, religion presents a growing challenge, as religious fervour increases alongside literacy rates among the Baloch. While this may appear advantageous for state institutions seeking cohesion through religion, religiosity has not weakened Balochistans nationalistic sentiments. The promotion of religious organisations and madressahs by state institutions has failed to make a significant impact, mainly due to the vast disparities within Baloch societys tribal, rural, and urban composition, which foster diverse political interests. The very forces undermining peace are now major power players. At the national level, the provinces poor human development and governance indicators leave ample space for resistance politics. Sociopolitical changes often trigger paradoxical sentiments, with simultaneous pro-development and anti-development attitudes emerging. When the sense of deprivation intensifies, and resource distribution becomes contentious, it creates a conducive environment for militants to recruit, expand, and diversify their targets and tactics. Targeting non-combatants of the majority group reflects a deepening societal anger at this level. This is the most crucial level, as the state has to rethink and correct its approach towards Balochistan. The writer is a security analyst. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : The lethal troika
Description : MANY factors were responsible for the defeat of the erstwhile Soviet Union and then the US in Afghanistan. A common factor was the existence of a combination of extremely resilient militant groups resisting both superpowers. This combination consisted of three categories of militants: local Afghan militants resisting foreign invaders; Pakistani militants crossing over to help their Afghan brethren; and thousands of mujahideen from various countries, particularly in the Middle East, participating in the Afghan jihad. With some variations in their composition, role and external supporters, they fought together against the US and USSR for 30 years, forcing them to withdraw. Alarmingly, after the US withdrawal from Afghanistan in 2021, this Afghanistan-based lethal troika now targets Pakistan. The situation necessitates a fundamental shift in the terrorist threat assessment in Pakistan  from focusing exclusively on the Tehreek-i-Taliban Pakistan to broadening the threat calculus to the troika of the TTP, Afghan Taliban, and Al Qaeda. Concerning the nexus between the Taliban and TTP, the latest UN report on Afghanistan states that the Afghan government was supplying weapons, training facilities and regular financial packages to the TTP. Al Qaedas primary goal, after lying low in the region for many years, is to revive itself without annoying its Afghan hosts or attracting the Wests adverse attention. In view of this, it seems to have opted to carry out its activities in Pakistan through the TTP, while staying below the international radar. The importance Al Qaeda gives to the TTP is evident in that it selected 15 of its commanders to assist the group conduct terrorist attacks in Pakistan. It also supplied armed fighters to the TTP in its attack in Chitral in September 2023, which killed four security officials. Al Qaedas camp in Kunar, headed by Hakim ul Masri, is responsible for training suicide bombers for the TTP. The TTP, which has been the most lethal terrorist group in Pakistan over the last three years, is on the same page with the Taliban and Al Qaeda not only because of an ideological affinity and a shared history of fighting foreign invaders in Afghanistan, but also due to similar goals of Sharia enforcement in Pakistan. The TTP intends to replicate in Pakistan what the Taliban did in Afghanistan. There were reports of the TTP helping the other two members of the troika by killing Taliban members defecting to the rival Islamic State-Khorasan Province in Afghanistan. The basic point is that while the troika is united on targeting Pakistan, the members play different roles. The Taliban are likely to help TTP discreetly in Afghanistan by providing sanctuary, with Al Qaeda supporting both openly in Afghanistan through mentoring and in Pakistan through its sympathisers. With its edge, the TTP is likely to carry out ground attacks in Pakistan and lead a campaign to build up its narrative of violent extremism. As far as the strategy and tactics to be adopted by the troika go, the TTP intends to replicate in Pakistan what the Taliban did in Afghanistan. In a recent interview to Khorasan Diary, TTP ameer Noor Wali Mehsud stated, our jihad in Pakistan  has entered a decisive phase. He went on to say ominously: Pakistani security agencies have unjustly occupied our homeland and our goal is to liberate our homeland and implement the divine law. In a nutshell, the TTP seems to be falling back on the two-point narrative of resistance in Afghanistan, ie, liberation of homeland and enforcement of divine laws. This brings us to the likely impact of the troika on the terrorist threat landscape in Pakistan. Since 2021, the number of terrorist attacks in Pakistan has been consistently increasing every year. This is likely to continue in 2024, with three possible changes. One, the number of Afghan nationals taking part in terrorist attacks in Pakistan may increase  we recall here the suicide bombing against military personnel in 2023 in Bannu by Afghans. Two, given its penchant for high-profile attacks, Al Qaeda may train the TTP to carry out such attacks. Three, given that the top Al Qaeda and Taliban instructors will train TTP members, the quality and sophistication of the attacks in 2024 are likely to be enhanced. Another area likely to be impacted by the troika is infiltration. Earlier, in the 1990s, Al Qaeda infiltrated educational institutions such as Karachi and Punjab universities to recruit educated youth. These recruitment cells in universities may be reactivated. Also, to stay abreast of latest government planning in counterterrorism, the TTP, like the Taliban did in Afghanistan, may attempt to infiltrate government departments, including intel agencies. The third and most important dimension of infiltration is that of the military, which was carried out by Al Qaeda in Pakistan in the late 1990s. It may be pertinent to mention that the last attempted terrorist attack by Al Qaeda was in 2014 in Karachi, when a group of naval officers tried to hijack a navy frigate and crash into a US ship in the open seas. Al Qaeda worked somewhat openly in Pakistan from the 1980s to 2001, and built up an elaborate network of civilian volunteers in many cities of Pakistan, who assisted in collecting funds, recruiting volunteers, and providing hideouts for the group. These sleeper cells might again be contacted by it and reactivated. Similarly, there were some Pakistani militant organisations of the 1980s, like the Harkatul Mujahideen, Lashkar-e-Taiba, etc, sympathetic to Al Qaeda and lying low these days. Al Qaeda may re-establish contact with them and get their support for the TTP. Finally, both the Taliban and Al Qaeda are known for their high-quality propaganda campaign. The TTP media wing lacks that finesse. In the light of guidance from the Taliban and Al Qaeda, we are likely to witness a significant improvement in the quality of propaganda. As Sun Tsu stated, if you know your enemy and you know yourself, you need not fear the result of a hundred battles. Sadly, it seems that Pakistan is erring in assessing the collective capabilities of the TTP, supported by the Taliban and Al Qaeda. The writer is a former police officer who was Nactas first national coordinator. Published in Dawn, May 11th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : An inclusive judiciary
Description : ACCORDING to media reports, a recent meeting of the Judicial Commission of Pakistan (JCP) was adjourned without finalising changes in its rules. This was because the law minister informed the members that the federal government was considering amending the Constitution to revise the appointment process of high court and Supreme Court (SC) judges. The government has thus far not revealed details of its proposed amendments. Some indication of possible reform can be found in the PML-Ns manifesto, which provides for an inclusive procedure for appointment of Superior Court Judges on merit. The PPPs manifesto recognises the importance of diversity, and promises to increase representation for women, minorities, and underrepresented segments of society in the judiciary. The PTIs manifesto makes similar commitments regarding making the judiciary more inclusive and the process of appointments more transparent. Importantly, the committee constituted in December 2023 to review the Judicial Commission Rules, 2010, also listed diversity as one of the key areas that required consideration. The major parties and courts agree there is need for reform in the appointments process. It appears, therefore, that the major political parties and the courts agree there is need for reform in the appointments process to make it more inclusive and the judiciary more diverse. Specifically, a number of reforms will be required to achieve this objective. The first issue that needs to be addressed is that of framing. Often, inclusion and diversity are considered contrary to the idea of merit, and are reduced merely to tokenism and tick-box exercises. This perception must be strongly challenged. The inclusion of women as well as other marginalised groups in the administration of justice is a cross-cutting issue, with implications for the credibility and legitimacy of the justice system in larger society. It should be seen as an objective in itself as well as an essential pre-condition for the effective protection of human rights and substantive equality. It is now recognised that diversity is not an optional extra but a basic component of the judiciarys ability to do its job. And that diversity and inclusion should be considered a part of merit and not in opposition to it. This is why a number of constitutions recognise the importance of diversity in the judiciary  specifically, greater inclusion of women  but also consideration for religious, racial and other factors, depending on the context. Any amendments to the process of judicial appointments, therefore, should expressly provide for the equal representation of women, inclusion and diversity as objectives of the judicial appointments process. Second, the composition of the JCP needs amendment. Currently, it comprises the chief justice of Pakistan, four most senior judges of the SC, one former judge of the SC, the federal law and justice minister, the attorney general of Pakistan, and a senior SC advocate. When the JCP is considering appointments for the high courts, it includes four additional members. At present, all members of the JCP are men. This is not accidental, but a consequence of the larger exclusion of women from the top echelons of the legal profession in the country. Its composition also suffers from lack of diversity and inclusion of members who are not from the judiciary or the bar. This absence has an adverse impact on the JCPs credibility and is not sustainable. Article 175A of the Constitution should, therefore, be amended to make the JCP more diverse, and also aim to ensure that its composition broadly reflects that of larger society in terms of gender, ethnicity, religious groups, and regional balance. Third, there is currently an absence of any criteria for appointments to the SC and high courts. The Constitution only stipulates the requirement of age, citizenship, and minimum professional experience. The Judicial Commission Rules are also completely silent on the criteria on which the JCP nominates or assesses candidates. The lack of transparent and public criteria on which judicial appointments are made is incompatible with international standards and best practices on judicial appointments. Changes in the judicial appointments process should, therefore, include criteria on which candidates are considered for recommendation, and give due consideration to the need for the progressive attainment of gender equity and the removal of other historic factors of discrimination and marginalisation. The fourth issue that also has an impact on inclusion and diversity is how nominations are initiated. At present, chief justices have the sole power of initiation; ie, it is only the chief justice of the relevant court who can recommend names of candidates, who are then considered by the JCP for nominations to the parliamentary committee. This power has dubious roots, creates an unnecessary hierarchy within the JCP, and has led to the perception of misuse. In a number of jurisdictions, including the UK and South Africa, the bodies empowered to make judicial appointments invite interested candidates to apply to be considered for appointment to the Supreme Court. This model opens up the judicial appointments process, allows a more diverse range of eligible candidates to apply, and eliminates any bias, real or perceived, in the initiation stage. The government should, therefore, consider making provision for the JCP inviting applications for vacancies in the high courts and SC. The fifth area that needs reform is lack of transparency. At present, the deliberations and proceedings of the JCP are secret and opaque. The public has no information about why certain candidates are chosen for consideration and on what basis candidates are selected for nomination. In the larger context of discriminatory practices and attitudes against women and other marginalised groups, such secrecy often works to their detriment and leads to the perception of bias in the appointments process. While the detailed deliberations of the JCP need not be made public, the reasons for selecting certain candidates for nomination must be disclosed. Most importantly, perhaps, the governments reform package must take into consideration input from a broad range of stakeholders. Opaque and hasty attempts at such far-reaching legislation that are not consultative would defeat the very objectives of transparency, merit, and inclusion such reform claims to achieve. The writer is a legal adviser for the International Commission of Jurists. reema.omer@icj.org X: reema_omer Published in Dawn, May 11th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Child marriages
Description : THE recent judgement of the Lahore High Court in Azka Wahid vs Province of Punjab has declared the arbitrary distinction in the legally prescribed minimum age of marriage in the Punjab Child Marriage Restraint Act, 1929  18 years for men and 16 years for women  as unconstitutional.  Decades of lobbying and bona fide legislative attempts in the past to correct this differentiation in the law were almost always thwarted through forceful opposition that labelled such attempts as interference with the religiously prescribed standard to determine readiness of a person for marriage  puberty, which varies greatly between males and females.  However, the definition of a child in the 1929 Act is not premised on the onset of puberty, but on ages set by the legislature as per its wisdom to curtail the menace of child marriages. This non-puberty-based age prescription for marriage in the 1929 Act has on occasion been challenged before the Federal Shariat Court as un-Islamic. The FSC has, however, continued to recognise the states mandate to prescribe such minimum age for marriage as being in consonance with Sharia, and necessary to ensure that parties to a marriage attain the level of education, physical and intellectual development, mental maturity and economic stability important for a healthy and meaningful union.  It is important to note that the FSC has not once held the gendered differential in the prescribed minimum age of marriage as religiously required. Yet, such differential has continued to subsist in our law (excepting the province of Sindh) despite repeated calls and efforts for change. The Lahore High Courts judgement in the Azka Wahid case is then of great significance. The court has finally held that different ages prescribed for a male and female child in the 1929 Act are not based on any intelligible criterion, and violate the constitutional guarantee of equal treatment of the sexes under Article 25 of the Constitution. The court has accordingly directed the government of Punjab to issue a revised version of the law, prescribing a uniform minimum age of marriage for men and women.  Such uniform prescription will make marriage laws more consistent with the definition of the age of majority under the Majority Act, 1875, the definition of a child under international law, and the legal entitlement of a citizen to exercise certain civil and political rights, such as the rights to obtain an identity card, to vote, and to enter into a contract. Almost 19m girls in Pakistan are married before they turn 18. But will the increase in the permissible age for marriage of girls to 18 years serve as a necessary deterrent to child marriages? The law already criminalises the act of marrying a minor, solemnising such marriage and, on the part of parent or guardian, permitting such marriage to take place. The criminal penalties imposed for such acts are of no deterrent import.  According to Unicef, 18.9 million girls in Pakistan are married before they attain the age of 18 years; 4.6m are wedded before they turn 16  the legally prescribed age of marriage. The real problem lies in the fact that judicial decisions on the capacity of a woman (or man) to marry adhere to the puberty standard, setting at naught the importance of the minimum age prescriptions in the 1929 Act. The courts have continued to hold that a marriage of a pubert girl, entered into with her free will, is valid notwithstanding that she is under 16 years of age. It is a legal conundrum that the criminal act of marriage to a minor has nonetheless been recognised in our law as valid.  In 2022, the Islamabad High Court rejected the puberty standard and questioned this contradiction in our law. The court observed that the contract of marriage by its very definition is a contract whereby the parties agree to engage in sexual relations recognised by the State and society as legitimate  The court found it nonsensical to recognise a child marriage as a valid and legal contract, when the very acts of engaging in sexually explicit conduct or sexual intercourse with a minor, notwithstanding her/ his consent, amount to sexual abuse and statutory rape under Sections 377A and 375 of the Pakistan Penal Code  marriage being no exception to criminality under the said provisions. The court went on to reason that since the very object of a contract of marriage with a child is the performance of actions that are unlawful and forbidden by law, such contracts are void, ie, of no legal effect under Section 23 of the Contract Act, 1872. It is hoped that our jurisprudence grows to adopt the holistic and coherent interpretation of the law articulated by the Islamabad High Court. Such jurisprudential shift, coupled with tougher penal prescriptions in the 1929 Act, are essential to tackle the menace of child marriages.  The writer is a lawyer. Published in Dawn, May 11th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Areas of cooperation with Saudi Arabia identified: PM Shehbaz
Description : PRIME Minister Shehbaz Sharif has termed Pakistans recent diplomatic deliberations with Saudi Arabia great progress, Geo News reported. In an interview with Arab news channel Al Arabiya English, the premier said, We have identified areas of mutual cooperation, both at the government-to-government and business-to-business levels and that have been clearly identified. We now have a clear-cut way forward. The PM highlighted that both countries would work on mutual cooperation and investments in the field of mines and minerals as well as renewable energy, among other fields. The interview comes days after a Saudi investors delegation visited Pakistan.
The premier spoke about his maiden visit to the kingdom after starting his new term as the countrys chief executive. He also mentioned the visits made by the Saudi government and business delegations to strengthen diplomatic and trade ties between the two nations. PM Shehbaz said his meetings with Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed Bin Salman were positive. In response to a question, the premier termed the recent Pak-Saudi investment conference very productive and fruitful. While sharing details of his vision for economic stability, the PM mentioned his recent visit to the kingdom to attend the World Economic Forum meetings in which the discussions revolved around increasing agricultural production in Pakistan with the help of modern equipment and technology. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Exports to Europe fall despite GSP+
Description : ISLAMABAD: Pakistans exports to European countries declined 6.27 per cent in the first nine months of the current fiscal year. Exports to the European Union states have begun to dip in the current fiscal year despite a GSP+ status that allows most Pakistani goods a duty-free entrance into European markets. In October 2023, the European Parliament unanimously voted to extend the GSP+ status for another four years until 2027 for developing countries, including Pakistan, to enjoy duty-free or minimum duty on exports to Europe. In absolute terms, Pakistans exports to the EU dipped to $6.105bn in 9MFY24 from $6.27bn in the corresponding months of last year. According to figures compiled by the State Bank of Pakistan, the decline was mainly due to reduced demand for Pakistani goods in western, southern, and northern Europe. In FY23, exports to the EU dropped 4.41pc to $8.188bn from $8.566bn in the preceding fiscal year. Western Europe, which includes countries such as Germany, the Netherlands, France, Italy and Belgium, accounts for the largest portion of Pakistans exports to the EU. However, exports to this region have significantly decreased by 12pc. The export value stood at $2.947bn in the first nine months of FY24, down from $3.353bn during the same period last year. While exports to western, southern, and northern Europe have declined, there is a silver lining in the form of an uptick in exports to Eastern Europe. The exports saw an increase of 8.38pc to $466.19m in 9MFY24, up from $430.14m in the corresponding months last year. Exports to southern Europe declined 1.24pc to $2.216bn in 9MFY24 from $2.244bn in the corresponding period last year. In this region, exports to Spain grew 3.73pc to $1.084 in 9MFY24 from $1.045bn last year. Exports to Italy declined 3.22pc to $825.44m in 9MFY24, compared to $852.93 m in the same period last year. However, exports to northern Europe witnessed a 2.31pc dip. The export value to this region stood at $475.92m, down from $487.19m in the corresponding period last year. Before Brexit, Pakistans major export destination was the United Kingdom. In the post-Brexit period, Pakistans exports to the UK slightly went up to $1.529bn in 9MFY24 from $1.494bn over the corresponding period of last year, indicating an increase of 2.34pc. In FY23, Pakistans exports dipped by 10.63pc to $1.966bn to the UK from $2.20bn in the same period of the preceding year. The British government, however, has assured Islamabad that there will be no change in the post-Brexit scenario, as evident from Pakistans inclusion in its preferential market access scheme. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Fight till the last ball, PCB chief tells cricket team in Dublin
Description : Pakistan Cricket Board (PCB) Chairman Mohsin Naqvi on Sunday told the national team to fight till the last ball ahead of the second match of a three-match T20 series against Ireland. As he met players of the mens national team in the Irish capital of Dublin, the PCB quoted him as saying: Fight till the last ball; the competition should be apparent.
On Friday, Ireland recorded their maiden T20 win against Pakistan who could not defend a solid-looking 182-5 after being put in to bat first, dealing a shocking blow to the Babar Azam-led sides preparations for the World Cup, which is taking place next month in the United States. The loss to Ireland, who are in Pakistans group in the T20 World Cup, came after a series draw on home soil to a New Zealand squad missing most of their first-choice players. With Babar only recently reinstated as captain, it was another bump in the road for their tournament preparation.
Todays match will start at 7pm, with Ireland leading the series by 1-0. In a post on X, the PCB shared a video of Naqvi meeting the Green Shirts and speaking to them, adding that a detailed discussion on the action plan took place during the two-hour-long meetup. Encouraging the team, the PCB chairman urged the players to play with hard work, passion and a professional approach. He noted that T20 cricket needed a unique and aggressive approach, adding that victory was only possible if cricket was played in a modern manner. An action plan can be formulated while sitting in a room but the real test is on the ground, where the performance should be visible, the PCB quoted him as telling the team. Naqvi praised all players as undoubtedly talented, professional and the best, adding that the teams bowling attack was splendid. However, he emphasised that great attention was required when fielding so that the opponent cannot get any chance to score. The players are the hope for Pakistan and you have to meet the nations expectations. Teamwork is the fundamental thing for victory, the PCB chairman said. He noted that the public loved cricket and had expectations from the team. Naqvi said that success would come if all 11 of the players in the team performed with unity. No one is accepting the loss in the first match against Ireland. The real test after Ireland and England is the World Cup, he added. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Washington says use of its weapons by Tel Aviv in Gaza violated law
Description : RAFAH: The United States has issued a stunning criticism of Israels use of American weapons in the Gaza attack, after Israeli forces intensified operations around the southern city of Rafah, where more than a million displaced people are sheltering. Israels main international ally said in a report released on Friday that it was  reasonable to assess that Israel has used weapons in ways inconsistent with international humanitarian law during the seven-month crisis. But the long-awaited State Department report said it could not reach  conclusive findings and stopped short of blocking weapons shipments. Relations between the two allies slumped earlier in the week after US President Joe Biden said he would halt some arms deliveries if Israel went ahead with a full-scale assault on Rafah threatened by Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu. The US has warned that the reputational damage Israel will suffer if it storms a city where an estimated 1.4 million civilians are sheltering will far outweigh any possible military gain. UN chief Antonio Guterres said that Gaza risked an  epic humanitarian disaster if Israel launched a full-scale ground operation in Rafah. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : FOOTBALL: GIRLS KICKING MOUNTAINS
Description : The ground faces the barren mountains of Quetta in Hazara Town  it feels like an otherworldly place, one where seeing girls in public is a common sight. The girls warm up for their football match under the infinite blue sky on a Sunday morning. Wearing black, beige and pink scarves and shorts with leggings, the players are enthusiastic and ready to play. As the match begins, the atmosphere charges up  someone kicks the football, another teammate shouts an instruction, theres a cheer here and a sigh there  and soon theres a goal to great celebration! These were scenes from the Womens Football Academy when Eos visited  it is one of the only three football academies for women in Hazara Town, Quetta, according to Zahra Afzal, the founder. Zahra, 26, started playing football professionally five years ago. She has played football championships in Karachi and was also a part of the Under-18 team in the National Games. A sports aficionado and a bronze medalist in lawn tennis, Zahra also plays badminton, hockey and cricket. But football is her favourite.  Zahra Afzal runs the Womens Football Academy in Hazara Town, Quetta. What made her get into such an apparently thankless job? Once you start playing football, you forget all other games, she tells Eos. Although her passion for football began in childhood, she couldnt play professionally because of a lack of football academies for women in Hazara Town. After graduating from Sardar Bahadur Khan Womens University with a degree in media sciences, Zahra started working as a coordinator in the Aria Institute of Medical Science and decided to start her own academy. It has not been easy for Zahra to start an academy in Quetta, especially in Hazara Town. Theres no government support, especially for the womens team. There are no sponsors here, unlike in the big cities, such as Karachi and Lahore, she shares, adding that, even after two years of starting out, they still have no sponsors.  With a lack of support, Zahra deals with the logistics of keeping the academy running on her own. The ground rent is expensive  it costs 800 rupees per hour, she points out. We use the ground daily for two hours. Theres a monthly fee of Rs500 charged from the players, but for those who cannot afford to pay, especially orphans, the fee is exempted. The day starts early for the players  they train for two hours every day from 6am to 8am. Sundays are match days. Almost 35 girls train at Zahras academy  most of them are studying in government schools and are children of Afghan immigrants. When news of the governments plans to deport Afghan refugees started circulating, many of the players stopped attending training. Their families would ask them to not go, fearing that theyd be picked up and deported, Zahra shares. She adds that two of her best players dropped out due to these fears. Sakina Nazari, 17, wasnt interested in football three months ago but now she dreams of pursuing a career in football. She was persuaded by a friend, who trains at the same academy, to start playing. Football is like therapy and is also good for fitness, Sakina tells Eos. I get a nice feeling when I play  it feels as if I have some control over something. When I wasnt playing football and stayed at home, I would have a general sense of lethargy, but since I started playing, I feel healthy. Sakinas comments about football being therapeutic resonate with many Hazara girls. In recent years, football has emerged as a game-changer for Hazara girls, as it offers solace to the persecuted-community.  For a long time, the Hazaras have been discriminated against, targeted by attacks and killed in bombings. In the last 14 years, more than 2,000 Hazaras have been reportedly killed, according to areportpublished by the National Commission of Human Rights Pakistan. As a Hazara I might not be able to make it far in football due to discrimination and lack of opportunities for our community, but I still want to give sports my best. We should be judged solely on the basis of our talent, she adds. While her family has been supportive, Sakina says society in general is very close-minded. When we go out in our tracksuits, we get weird glares and are subjected to judgement. Sometimes resistance comes from families too. In such cases, Zahra conducts meetings with the parents to convince them to allow their girls to play. Zahra shares that her vision is to not only train the girls in football but also to train them for life, so that theyre ready to face any challenge. Players from her academy have travelled to different cities and out of town for tournaments  an experience that has added to their confidence. More than the training, these events help them grow. The 34th National Games of Pakistan were hosted by Quetta last year and some six players from Zahras academy were selected to represent Balochistan. Aliya Shuja, 19, said she wants the government to invest in football. Its an important sport thats played internationally. We have so far only been focused on investing in and promoting cricket, she points out.  If the government would promote football, the youth would not go for drugs or bad deeds, she says, adding that they just need support and facilities from the government and are willing to pay a fee to train on government-supported grounds that have world-class training facilities. Aliya has been playing football for a long time but has been training at the academy for a month now. Her favourite football team is FC Barcelona and she looks up to Alexia Putellas, a Spanish footballer. I want to play in international leagues and make a career out of football, she says.  Dua Zahra, 15, was inspired by her father, a football coach. I want to be a keeper and my dad trained me at home, shares Dua, who has been playing at the academy for a year now.  Although her father is supportive of her dreams to pursue football as a career, her paternal grandmother often tells her football is not for girls. I just ignore what she says and continue playing, says Dua giggling. The writer is a freelance journalist.
X: @sommulbaloch Published in Dawn, EOS, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Situation in AJK calms down after 2 days of violent clashes
Description : Following violent clashes over the last 48 hours, which left a policeman dead, the situation in Muzaffarabad seemed to have calmed down on Sunday, with a Rangers detachment that was sent to Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK) from Kohala having been withdrawn. AJK witnessed violent clashes between the police and activists of a rights movement amid a wheel-jam and shutter-down strike across the territory on Friday and Saturday, which left at least one police official dead and more than 90 others injured, officials told Dawn.com on Saturday. Mirpur Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP) Kamran Ali had said that Sub-inspector Adnan Qureshi succumbed to a gunshot wound in the chest in the town of Islamgarh, where he was deployed to stop a rally for Muzaffarabad under the banner of the Jammu Kashmir Joint Awami Action Committee (JAAC). The JAAC, which has traders at the forefront in most parts of the state, has been seeking the provision of electricity as per hydropower generation cost in AJK, subsidised wheat flour and an end to the privileges of the elite class. They called for the strike following the arrest of at least 70 of their members in raids on Thursday. Reports emerged in the wake of the protests on Sunday that three Rangers battalions had entered the territory through Kohala and were awaiting further orders. However, AJK Minister for Rural Development Faisal Mumtaz Rathore confirmed that the Rangers, due to the intervention of President Asif Zardari, were called back as soon as they entered Azad Kashmir since the situation had calmed down. Meanwhile, in Islamabad, former prime minister of AJK Sardar Abdul Qayyum Niazi slammed the deployment, calling it a drama and an attempt to score political points. First they send them, then call them back, what is this? the ex-AJK PM said. Those fighting for their rights and engaging in protest are free to do so, but they must remain peaceful, Niazi said in a press conference. He added that they (the protestors) must not give the enemy a chance to sow discord within the territory and create infighting. In a post on Facebook, Rathore acknowledged the public demands for cheap electricity, but admitted that addressing them was out of his hands. The big demand of the people, the demand for cheap electricity and the end of loadshedding, falls under the jurisdiction of the Government of Pakistan, Rathore said. Urging the public to remain peaceful, he said, In this one year [I have been in office], I have never been against the right to peaceful protest and [never] supported violence against people. In the aftermath of the protests, JAAC leader Shaukat Nawaz Mir reiterated that the committee is a peaceful organisation and willing to negotiate with the authorities to ensure the provision of cheap electricity and cheap flour. He also appreciated the withdrawal of the Rangers from the area. We have planned another shutter-down strike, he told reporters on Sunday. We have been peaceful for the last year and always will be a peaceful movement. This territory and its institutions and police are our own. Mir maintained that the JAAC is advocating for the rights of the public in AJK, but it is the bureaucrats who do not understand the publics needs that are doing the damage. The JAAC is peaceful and open to negotiations, Mir added, requesting to be notified by the authorities about decisions taken. We do not want to hurt anyone. He also slammed the federal government for not cutting down spending while at the same time claiming they have no room in the budget to subsidise electricity or flour. The government claims they cant provide cheap electricity and flour because they have no budget, but they have the money for watches and cars, Mir said, adding that the federal government and the prime minister should be ashamed. I dont want my forum to be controversial, Mir said. We are made up of respectable politicians  the local council is standing with us. The JAAC leader added that the movement was successful since members of multiple parties and councils are on our side. Our nation is conscious now. There is no politics here, we just want our rights and identity. Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif has taken notice of the situation in AJK and urged PML-N leadership and AJK prime minister Chaudhry Anwar-ul-Haq to pursue negotiations with the JAAC. Posting on X, he said, While debate, discussion and peaceful protests are the beauties of democracy, there should be absolutely no tolerance for taking the law in ones own hands and damaging government properties. He added that amidst situations of chaos and dissent, there will always be people who rush in to score political points.
The prime minister said that he was in contact with PML-N leaders and the AJK government, urging them to talk to the JAAC and resort to [a] peaceful course of action for resolution of their (JAACs) demands. Shehbaz added that despite the efforts of detractors, the issue will be resolved soon. PML-N leader Rana Sanaullah, adviser to the prime minister on political and public affairs, said that the situation in AJK had been mishandled and that the damage could have been mitigated, had both parties chosen the path of negotiation in the first place. Speaking on Geo News programme Naya Pakistan, he said, This situation was mishandled. The PM has called the JAAC to the table with respect. If this had happened earlier, it would have been better and the damage would not have been done. Sanaullah said that people wanted to march to Muzaffarabad, but expressed faith that the government and the JAAC would resolve the matter through negotiations, thus rendering the planned marches redundant. When asked about the JAACs demands, he said, Demands need to be discussed and cannot be granted at face value. There are some demands that we cannot constitutionally fulfill, and some that are financially complicated. This is why we need to sit down and talk, to see what is possible. The ex-minister added that the government will consider requests that are feasible and possible. This is a law and order situation, not a political one. The AJK assembly is competent and its members have the ability to bring about a change, Sanaullah said. President Asif Ali Zardari said all stakeholders should show patience and try to resolve the issues through dialogue and mutual consultation. While meeting a PPP delegation from the AJK legislative assembly, the president said that political parties, the establishment and the people have to act responsibly so the hostile elements cannot take advantage of the situation.
A delegation of members of the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Legislative Assembly, belonging to Pakistan Peoples Party Parliamentarians, called on President Asif Ali Zardari, at Aiwan-e-Sadr, on May 12.Photo courtesy: PID
The demands of the people of Azad Jammu and Kashmir must be met according to law, Zardari said, adding that he would talk to Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif to find a solution. He said that the socio-economic development of the region should be given priority including health, education, tourism and infrastructure. The president emphasised the need to bring remote areas at par with other developed areas of the country, expressing regret over the current situation in AJK. The president also expressed his condolences on the tragic death of the policeman and prayed for the speedy recovery of all those injured. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Heros welcome for hockey team in Lahore after winning silver medal in Azlan Shah Cup
Description : The Pakistan hockey team was given a heros welcome on their arrival in Lahore on Sunday following their silver medal finish at the Sultan Azlan Shah Cup, where they narrowly lost in the final to a defensively stoic Japanese side on penalties. Pakistan remained unbeaten en route to the final but were left ruing their missed opportunities in the final where Japan came from behind and floored them in a penalty shootout.
Japan had taken an early lead but Roelant Oltmans side came back strongly with two goals in three minutes, only to relinquish their advantage before falling apart in the shootout. Upon arrival at Lahore, the team was greeted by a huge crowd, who presented the silver medalists with garlands and bouquets at the airport. Some fans were also seen holding placards and banners congratulating the team for their achievement against all odds. The hockey team was greeted at the airport by Chairman Prime Minister Youth Program Rana Mashhood, former Pakistan head coach Khawaja Junaid, HEC Director Javed Memon, former Olympian Akhtar Rasool, Shahbaz Senior and their family members. Upon the teams return, Rana Mashhood said that Pakistans youth had reconnected with the national sport due to the performance of the hockey side. We lost the match on penalty strokes otherwise these boys were unbeaten, he said adding that the future of the sport had revived in the country. Mashhood also announced a prize of Rs1 million to each player on behalf of the premier, adding that the prime minister will meet the national team at Prime Ministers House. The government of Pakistan will support them in future events, and the premier has called them over to PM House. Their services and efforts will be appreciated and rewarded accordingly, he said. In a closely fought final a day before, Japan dominated early on with quick attacking moves and got their reward in the 12th minute when Seren Tanaka made the breakthrough. Pakistan sprang into action and started the second half with more purpose, probing the Japanese defence. Ajaz Ahmed found the leveller when he was the quickest to react to a rebound in the 34th minute and Pakistan were celebrating again soon after when Abdul Rehman put the ball through the goalkeepers legs to give his side the lead. The twin strikes seemed to have rocked Japan but they regained their composure and Kazumasa Matsumotos effort brought parity with 13 minutes to go. It set up an interesting finale as both sides pressed for the winner, only to see the match go down to penalties. After the final had ended 2-2 in regulation time, Japan prevailed 4-1 in the shootout for their maiden Azlan Shah Cup crown. Roelant Oltmans said his side should have won the match in normal playing time. There were so many opportunities for us to get back and increase the score in our favour. In the first half we did great and also in the second half we created so many opportunities, he told reporters after the game. Pakistans next feature at the FIH Nations Cup in Poland begins later this month, and Oltmans said he hopes his side can go one better at the upcoming tournament. If you are in the final you must win the final, he added. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : IMF mission to meet Pakistani authorities next week to discuss next phase of engagement: official
Description : An International Monetary Fund (IMF) mission will meet Pakistani authorities next week to discuss the next phase of engagement, an official from the international money lender said on Sunday. Speaking to Dawn.com, Esther Perez Ruiz, the Funds resident representative for Pakistan, said: A mission team led by Nathan Porter, IMFs mission chief to Pakistan, will meet with authorities next week to discuss the next phase of engagement. The aim is to lay the foundation for better governance and stronger, more inclusive, and resilient economic growth that will benefit all Pakistanis, she added. Pakistan last month completed a short-term $3 billion programme, which helped stave off sovereign default, but the government has stressed the need for a fresh, longer-term programme. Last week, the Fund said that a mission was expected to visit Pakistan this month to discuss the FY25 budget, policies, and reforms under a potential new programme for the welfare of all Pakistanis. Pakistan narrowly averted default last summer, and the $350bn economy has stabilised after the completion of the last IMF programme, with inflation coming down to around 17 per cent in April from a record high 38pc last May. The country is still dealing with a high fiscal shortfall and while the external account deficit has been controlled through import control mechanisms, it has come at the expense of stagnating growth, which is expected to be around 2pc this year compared to negative growth last year. Pakistan is expected to seek at least $6bn and request additional financing from the Fund under the Resilience and Sustainability Trust. On Friday, the Fund said that downside risks for the economy remain exceptionally high. Downside risks remain exceptionally high. While the new government has indicated its intention to continue the SBAs (standby arrangement) policies, political uncertainty remains significant, said the IMF in its staff report following the second and final review under the standby agreement. The Fund added that political complexities and high cost of living could weigh on policy, adding that policy slippages, together with lower external financing, could undermine the narrow path to debt sustainability and place pressure on the exchange rate. The IMF also said higher commodity prices and disruptions to shipping, or tighter global financial conditions, would also adversely affect external stability for the cash-strapped nation. The fund stressed the need for timely post-programme external financing disbursements. Additional input from Reuters Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : No such thing as strategic state-owned enterprises, says Finance Minister Aurangzeb
Description : Finance Minister Muhammad Aurangzeb on Sunday said that there was no such thing as strategic state-owned enterprises (SOEs) as he stressed the need for privatisation. He made the remarks at a pre-budget conference in Lahore, two days after  Deputy Prime Minister Ishaq Dar said the government would limit its business only to strategic and essential SOEs under its domain but their number would be reduced from 40 after scrutiny. Chairing the Cabinet Committee on Privatisation (CCoP) meeting, which was attended by the finance minister, Dar said privatisation of loss-making SOEs would be a priority. The meeting noted that 40 SOEs were currently categorised as strategic or essential, but respective ministries would submit their details to the Cabinet Committee on State-Owned Enterprises (CCoSOE). The CCoSOE will determine the status of the SOEs to be categorised as strategic or essential entities. Speaking on Sunday, Aurangzeb said: There is no such as [a] strategic SOE. Talking about the meeting chaired by Dar on Friday, he continued, We are absolutely on the same wavelength  that there is no such thing as a strategic SOE. The finance minister said that a meeting would be held tomorrow where we will go back to various ministries and say that all this should be handed over to the private sector. There will be public-private partnership and we will accelerate the privatisation agenda, he said. Commenting on concerns regarding the privatisation of Pakistan International Airlines (PIA), Aurangzeb said the government was not just looking at foreign investors. They are local and foreign investors who are bidding [] there is no such thing that we are only looking at foreign investors, he said. Commenting on a fresh loan programme with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) programme, he said that a larger and longer programme was needed to bring permanence in macroeconomic stability and structural reforms. He also talked about energy reforms, saying that there were leakages and stressed the need for stopping theft. He said that changes were being brought to the boards of distribution companies (Discos) in order to bring in those from the private sector for better corporate governance. And then you will see how we bring those Discos towards concessions or privatisation or a combination of both, he emphasised. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Fight till the last ball, PCB chief tells cricket team in Dublin
Description : Pakistan Cricket Board (PCB) Chairman Mohsin Naqvi on Sunday told the national team to fight till the last ball ahead of the second match of a three-match T20 series against Ireland. As he met players of the mens national team in the Irish capital of Dublin, the PCB quoted him as saying: Fight till the last ball; the competition should be apparent.
On Friday, Ireland recorded their maiden T20 win against Pakistan who could not defend a solid-looking 182-5 after being put in to bat first, dealing a shocking blow to the Babar Azam-led sides preparations for the World Cup, which is taking place next month in the United States. The loss to Ireland, who are in Pakistans group in the T20 World Cup, came after a series draw on home soil to a New Zealand squad missing most of their first-choice players. With Babar only recently reinstated as captain, it was another bump in the road for their tournament preparation.
Todays match will start at 7pm, with Ireland leading the series by 1-0. In a post on X, the PCB shared a video of Naqvi meeting the Green Shirts and speaking to them, adding that a detailed discussion on the action plan took place during the two-hour-long meetup. Encouraging the team, the PCB chairman urged the players to play with hard work, passion and a professional approach. He noted that T20 cricket needed a unique and aggressive approach, adding that victory was only possible if cricket was played in a modern manner. An action plan can be formulated while sitting in a room but the real test is on the ground, where the performance should be visible, the PCB quoted him as telling the team. Naqvi praised all players as undoubtedly talented, professional and the best, adding that the teams bowling attack was splendid. However, he emphasised that great attention was required when fielding so that the opponent cannot get any chance to score. The players are the hope for Pakistan and you have to meet the nations expectations. Teamwork is the fundamental thing for victory, the PCB chairman said. He noted that the public loved cricket and had expectations from the team. Naqvi said that success would come if all 11 of the players in the team performed with unity. No one is accepting the loss in the first match against Ireland. The real test after Ireland and England is the World Cup, he added. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Canada arrests fourth Indian national in killing of Sikh activist
Description : A fourth Indian national was charged by Canadian authorities on Saturday in the 2023 killing of a separatist Sikh leader in Vancouver. Amandeep Singh, 22, was already being held for unrelated gun charges before being charged with first-degree murder and conspiracy to commit murder in the slaying of Hardeep Singh Nijjar. Three other Indian nationals were arrested this month. The killing sparked a diplomatic row between Ottawa and New Delhi when Prime Minister Justin Trudeau linked Indian intelligence to the killing. Nijjar  who immigrated to Canada in 1997 and became a citizen in 2015  had advocated for a separate Sikh state, known as Khalistan, carved out of India. He had been wanted by Indian authorities for alleged terrorism and conspiracy to commit murder  allegations he denied. He was shot dead on June 18, 2023, by masked assailants in the parking lot of the Sikh temple he led in suburban Vancouver. Trudeau announced several months later that Canada had credible allegations connecting Indian intelligence to the slaying. India dismissed the allegations as absurd and responded furiously, briefly curbing visas for Canadians and forcing Ottawa to withdraw diplomats. In November, the US Justice Department charged an Indian citizen living in the Czech Republic with allegedly plotting a similar assassination attempt on American soil. Prosecutors said in unsealed court documents that an Indian government official was also involved in the planning. The shock allegations came after US President Joe Biden hosted Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi for a rare state visit, as Washington seeks closer ties with India against Chinas growing influence. US intelligence agencies have assessed that the plot on American soil was approved by Indias top spy official at the time, Samant Goel, the Washington Post reported in April. Canada is home to some 770,000 Sikhs, who make up about two per cent of the countrys population, with a vocal minority calling for an independent state of Khalistan. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Second night of auroras seen amid extreme solar storm
Description : Auroras lit up skies across swaths of the planet for the second night in a row on Saturday, after already dazzling Earthlings from the United States to Tasmania to the Bahamas the day before. A powerful solar storm  which could continue into Sunday  has triggered spectacular celestial shows usually confined to the far northern reaches of the planet, hence their nickname of the northern lights. I have the sensation of living through a historic night in France [] It was really charged, with solar particles and emotions, Eric Lagadec, an astrophysicist at the Observatoire de Cote dAzur, wrote on social media after the first night. Find good spots, away from the lights, with a clear view to the north! Late on Saturday evening, pictures again started trickling onto social media as people in the United States reported sightings, though not as strong as Friday nights. The first of several coronal mass ejections (CMEs)  expulsions of plasma and magnetic fields from the Sun   came just after 4pm GMT on Friday, according to the US-based National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)s Space Weather Prediction Center (SWPC). It was later upgraded to an extreme geomagnetic storm   the first since the Halloween Storms of October 2003 that caused blackouts in Sweden and damaged power infrastructure in South Africa. Fridays storm was listed as hitting level five geomagnetic conditions  the highest on the scale. Saturday saw G3 to G5 conditions, with G4 or higher conditions predicted Sunday and G3 conditions possible into Monday. But no major disruptions to power or communications networks appear to have been reported this time around, despite initial worries from authorities. There have only been preliminary reports of power grid irregularities, degradation to high-frequency communications, GPS and possibly satellite navigation, the SWPC said. Elon Musk, whose Starlink satellite internet operator has some 5,000 satellites in low Earth orbit, said his satellites were under a lot of pressure, but holding up so far. However Chinas National Centre for Space Weather issued a red alert on Saturday morning, warning the storm will impact communications and navigation in most areas of the country, state news agency Xinhua reported. Auroras were visible in the northern half of the country, according to media reports. Excitement over the phenomenon   and otherworldly photos of pink, green and purple night skies   popped up across the world, from Mont Saint-Michel on the French coast to Payette, Idaho  in the western United States  to Australias island state of Tasmania.
People pose for photos as a geomagnetic storm lights up the night sky above the Bonneville Salt Flats on May 10 in Wendover, Utah.  AFP
Unlike solar flares, which travel at the speed of light and reach Earth in around eight minutes, CMEs travel at a more sedate pace, with officials putting the current average at 800 kilometres per second. The CMEs emanated from a massive sunspot cluster that is 17 times wider than our planet. People with eclipse glasses can also look for the sunspot cluster during the day. The Sun is approaching the peak of an 11-year cycle that brings heightened activity. NOAAs Brent Gordon encouraged the public to try to capture the night sky with phone cameras even if they couldnt see auroras with their naked eyes. Youd be amazed at what you see in that picture versus what you see with your eyes. Fluctuating magnetic fields associated with geomagnetic storms induce currents in long wires, including power lines, which can potentially lead to blackouts. Long pipelines can also become electrified, leading to engineering problems. Spacecraft are also at risk from high doses of radiation, although the atmosphere prevents this from reaching Earth. NASA has a dedicated team looking into astronaut safety and can ask astronauts on the International Space Station to move to places within the outpost that are better shielded. Even pigeons and other species that have internal biological compasses could be affected. Pigeon handlers have noted a reduction in birds coming home during geomagnetic storms, according to NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The most powerful geomagnetic storm in recorded history, known as the Carrington Event after British astronomer Richard Carrington, occurred in September 1859. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : ADB links support with IMFs clean chit
Description :   Given my interactions with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the dialogue decisiveness of the current government, I feel very hopeful that there will be a successor programme from the Fund, said the Asian Development Banks (ADB) Country Director for Pakistan Yong Ye in an exclusive interview on the sidelines of ADBs 57th Annual Meeting in Tbilisi this week. Tacitly indicating that support from ADB would only be possible with a clean chit from the Fund, Mr Ye expressed cautious optimism for the economy. Highlighting the uncertainties from last year, Mr Ye termed the IMF agreement announced in June as a miracle. Since then, however, he said, the caretaker government did a good job stabilising the economy under the Funds Stand-By Arrangement. More importantly, he added, with the IMF agreement in place, the central banks foreign exchange reserves increased from $4.4 billion to over $9bn in the week ending on May 3. While the country may still be in the ICU, its immediate liquidity crisis has been sorted, and default has been avoided. This has given some confidence to the markets, he said. Record highs of PSX Commenting on the frequent new highs of the Pakistan Stock Exchange (PSX), Mr Ye observed that previously, when the eurobond payment was due, there had been a lot of hype in the media with speculations about whether the country would be able to repay or default. Such pieces did not induce courage and the markets started fluctuating, contributing to a fluctuating exchange rate. Banks top official says Pakistan has sorted out immediate liquidity crisis, but still in ICU This time around, in April, when the $1bn eurobond payment was due, it was paid without fanfare, indicating much better market confidence. Other positive indicators, such as a narrowing external account deficit and recovering remittances, have also improved investor confidence. However, fiscal deficit challenges remain. One major reason behind them is the high interest rate and high debt servicing burden. Act on what you know In my first meeting with Finance Minister Muhammad Aurangzeb, he showed his commitment to implementing and acting on reforms, said Mr Ye. Pakistan does not need more economic prescriptions, he said, agreeing with the finance ministers recent statements. He said the general perception is that Pakistan knows what it needs to do but never does it. Act on what you know needs to be done. He emphasised that the ADB management wants to be with the government in this difficult time. The agency understands the need to ensure that the debt is sustainable rather than an added burden that does not remove the constraints the country is facing. While the economy is recovering, there is still uncertainty moving forward. The removal of this uncertainty depends very much on the governments commitment and ability to implement economic and structural reforms. A special arrangement Mr Ye emphasised the importance of investment in reviving the economy and the role the Special Investment Facilitation Council (SIFC) could play. My understanding of SIFC is that it is a special arrangement to attract foreign direct investment from some targeted countries, he said. From the ADBs point of view, while the SIFC may be a quick short-term solution, Pakistan still needs to look for long-term systematic solutions to attract foreign direct investment. This would require an overall enabling environment with improved regulations and transparency. Given past unsuccessful incidents such as Reko Diq, SIFC, at least in the short run, can demonstrate the countrys potential and ability for investment, which can then be further broadened for other countries. An important element in attracting FDI is the ability of firms to repatriate profit out of the country. At the moment, investors may believe that while earning money in Pakistan is possible, repatriating profits is challenging. Non-productivity of real estate The country needs to increase its revenue and rationalise expenditures, Mr Ye remarked. As an example, he highlights the real estate sector where a lot of savings are invested. The real estate sector is just financial addition with no value addition. If the country invests in its natural resources instead, the country will start rolling, he said. Inflation is on a downward trend, and if this trend continues, the monetary policy rate will come down, Mr Ye opinioned, resulting in a smaller burden of debt servicing and more fiscal room. This will also unlock the investment and borrowing by the private sector, he hoped. Since there is a lot of pent-up investment demand during the period of high interest rates, Pakistan may enter into a boom cycle when the rates start coming down. But for the revival to be sustainable, it all comes back to reforms, he said.  Remaining pledges While ADB was among the institutions that pledged support after the disastrous floods of 2022, almost the entire amount has yet to be disbursed. ADB had pledged about $1.5bn, of which only $108.79 million has been released according to a media report, with a further $340.9m expected this year. In response to why there has been a delay, Mr Ye said that the amount pledged was for reconstruction and that the process cannot be rushed. The damages have to be assessed along with the ground realities, keeping in mind the new climate risk profile and the possibility that these areas may be flooded again, he said. Pointing out that water was still standing in some areas till the start of this year, Mr Ye said that the new climate risk profile needs to be assessed before the feasibility study. Some roads need to be redesigned, followed by the procurement process, contract award, and finally, disbursement. The entire process is lengthy. Mr Ye identified several critical areas for Pakistans long-term economic growth. These include controlling inflation, reducing the fiscal deficit, and diversifying the export base. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Govt hints at raising wheat purchase target
Description :  Drive to buy 400,000 tonnes of grain kicks off; farmers want wheat procured from across Punjab
 Kissan leader urges govt to ensure official rate of staple, terms proposed subsidy a pittance LAHORE: The Pakistan Agricultural Storage and Services Corporation Limited (Passco) on Saturday began its second phase of wheat procurement from Faisalabad in line with a decision of the federal government to procure 400,000 tonnes more than the original target of 1.4 million tonnes. As he kick-started the second phase, Food Minister Rana Tanveer hinted at the possibility of further increasing the target to facilitate farmers. Passco had originally aimed to purchase 1.4m tonnes, but after farmers started protesting, the pressure on the federal and provincial governments piled on and the premier decided to increase the target to 1.8m tonnes. As of now, Passco has achieved 98 per cent of the initial target and distribution of gunny bags is already underway to meet the increased target. Farmers, however, are not happy with the governments decision to procure slightly more wheat than intended. They said Passco  a federal body  operated in 13 out of 97 tehsils in Punjab and the decision to purchase additional wheat from designated areas would have a negligible impact. According to farmers, the tradeable surplus this year is expected to be about 10m tonnes and buying 400,000 tonnes would hardly make any difference. Punjab, on the other hand, is reluctant to procure wheat from growers despite province-wide agitations and the persistent stance of farmers. This has also caused a significant impact on the price of wheat, with the staple being sold at a rate much lower than the official price of Rs3,900 per 40kg. The Pakistan Kissan Ittehad claimed that farmers had lost Rs1,150 billion under the wheat head alone due to the crashing prices which reportedly dipped below Rs3,000 per 40kg. Instead of procurement, the Punjab government said it would compensate farmers with interest-free loans of Rs150bn. Kissan leader Khalid Mahmood Khokar, however, is not impressed, saying the paltry subsidy came at a cost of Rs1,150bn. Instead of this gimmickry, please ensure an officially declared price, which the provincial government had itself calculated, announced, and promised, Mr Khalid urged the Punjab government. The crisis Pakistan is going through the most difficult wheat season of its history, exacerbated by policy failure and the import of millions of tonnes of wheat shortly before the bumper harvest. The bumper crop followed a record import of 3.5m tonnes by the private sector allegedly due to the weakness of the caretaker regime.
Against the backdrop of such a huge import, hoarders also released their stock to earn profit. The releases of stock by the hoarders and the import of the commodity flooded the market and even met the entire domestic requirement, leaving Passco and the Punjab Food Department with 4m tonnes of unexhausted stock. The 3.5m tonnes imports were staggered in a way, in the name of sustained supplies, that it overlapped with domestic harvesting season and created havoc for the domestic market, explained Muhammad Ramzan, a wheat trader from Lahore. At the start of this month, the Punjab government had promised a probe into the wheat scandal against the backdrop of protests by the farmers. On Friday, the farmers resumed their protests from Multan against the provincial governments decision to not buy wheat from farmers. At the protest, PKI leader Khokhar had said the agitation would continue against the government in every district of the province till the acceptance of their demands. He had said the federal government was procuring the wheat in 16 tehsils of the province, while the Punjab government had not purchased even a single grain so far. Federal government should also buy wheat from other tehsils of the province, he had demanded. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Footprints: the day the city of Karachi went berserk
Description : This article was originally published on May 12, 2017 KARACHI: Attempt after attempt fails to elicit comments from direct witnesses to the carnage that took place in Karachi on May 12 ten years ago. All these men served as judges in the countrys high courts and the apex court before they retired to re-join the legal fraternity as seasoned practitioners of the law. For each of my requests, I receive either excuse me, or sorry. Finally, one of them agrees to talk  but not openly.  Please dont mention my name, says the retired Sindh High Court judge as our conversation ends. You may write each and every word I have shared with you but not my name. I would prefer to be an anonymous source. One never knows here what can happen the next day: its better to stay away from even the memories of such controversial events. The ordeal he recalls of that bloody Saturday refreshes the grim memories of the city being under siege for nearly 24 hours, held hostage by forces in the face of whom even jurists and law-enforcers were helpless.  Two rival rallies had been planned that day  one by the legal fraternity, backed by parties then in the opposition, to welcome into the city the then deposed chief justice, Iftikhar Mohammed Chaudhry, and the other organised by the Muttahida Qaumi Movement (MQM), favoured by the then military dictator General Pervez Musharraf, in protest against the politicisation of the issue of the presidential reference against Mr Chaudhry. A certain level of fear had prevailed, but no one could have guessed the deeply disturbing events that were to follow  certainly not the then serving high court judge. I was travelling with my driver and armed guard to the Sindh High Court where the chief justice had to deliver an address when we were forced to stop near Sir Syed Girls College in Nazimabad, he says.  Armed motorcyclists surrounded his official, flag-bearing car, pulled out his driver and switched off its engine, seizing the keys. The bikers then bludgeoned the stationary car several times, so hard that its bumper fell off. In one of the busiest and most densely populated city neighbourhoods, a serving judge sat in fear.  I talked to them, he says. They were obviously aware that I was a high court judge. After debate and argument, they allowed me to leave but I reminded them that I couldnt because keys of my car had been snatched by one of them. Finally, the key was returned and the judge was allowed to leave. As he got back into his car, the men surrounding him came up with their last strike: they stripped his car of the national flag. At the nearest police station of Pak Colony, he waited for nearly two hours for police security to arrive, as promised by the Governors House after it was informed about the episode. Then came an SSP-ranking officer with his team to escort me, he says. The police left us some two kilometres from the Singh High Court building, saying that they could no longer help us. My driver parked the car at a safer place. Then, with my driver and guard, I walked to the high court to find all entrances blocked. Finally, I jumped over one of the walls to enter the building. If this was the experience of a high court judge, one can only imagine the situation for political workers. In anticipation of the two rallies, law enforcers had been put on high alert the day before. The fire brigade had been directed to remain on standby and hospitals were asked to ready themselves. But the next day, hapless citizens found that the city had been abandoned by the law-enforcement agencies, and armed youths were wandering at will. Nasir Khan, one of the Awami National Party workers, witnessed a few of them at Malir Halt. I meet Nasir almost at the same spot where he narrowly escaped death. As our rally from Quaidabad reached here [Malir Halt], it came under fire, he says. I miraculously remained unhurt but I watched two of my friends die from bullet wounds and several others fell injured. It was a terrible experience and even today I shiver while recalling that day. After 10 years, only eyewitness accounts of the May 12 events remain. Justice and any action on the part of the state are still awaited. Should we call ourselves humanity when the fallen remain un-avenged a year to a day since that fateful day in May? wrote Justice Qazi Faez Isa, a Supreme Court judge and former chief justice of the Balochistan High Court, in this paper in 2008. Years later, the question remains pertinent. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2017  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Mothers Day: Reflections of a mother
Description : This piece was originally published in Dawn, Young World on May 9, 2020. Spending sleepless nights while tending to children, feeding them, changing diapers, etc. are a part of life of every mother having infants. When the infants grow up a little, the next phase is to educate them, teach them manners and make them learn to be a part of the world out there. It is tough to do all that for me, like every other mother. After all it is not all I have to do. One has to focus on ones career and household chores at the same time, and fulfil ones duties towards other family members. Did I mention a me-time somewhere in all that I said? I guess not. There is no mentioning of it simply because there is no time left for me while doing all that I do. It is said that you learn about the true value of parents once you have children of your own. I have found this to be exactly true. The sacrifices and unconditional love it takes to be a mother has certainly made me realise the sacrifices my mother made in bringing me up. Looking back at my life, I wish I could change all those moments in my life when, as a child, I misbehaved with my mother. I also wish that I had spent more time with her and made life easier for her. As my children grow up, they seem to become less obedient and respectful. This really hurts. I see this as a general trend in all the children, nowadays. With some exceptions, the older they get, the less respect they show to their mother and elders in general. Having a mind of ones own is fine, but there cannot be any excuse for bad behaviour towards ones mother. And also just because your mother is less strict and more friendly than your father, it should not lead you to not show respect to her. Mothers like me do not want our children to be our puppets. All we ask for is recognition of our love and efforts. Expecting respectfulness is a part of that recognition. Every mother would love her child to come up to her and, as a minimum, thank her for her efforts. It would be great if the child could offer to help her in little ways. If nothing else, they should at least not leave any mess for the mother to clean up! Mothers Day is important, but it is more than just a special day. It is really a reminder that mothers deserve our respect and recognition for their love at all times. For a child to have this realisation certainly means more to mothers than having a card or flowers on Mothers Day. This is because it means that this realisation would translate into care and respect for ones mother. For my part, I have started taking care of my mother in all the ways I can. While I do not live with her, I try my best to stay in touch or visit her as much as I can. Taking care of her health and what she wants has become very important for me. It does not matter to me what others do or say about taking care of their mothers. All that matters is what my mother deserves. And that exactly is my message to you all! Do not look at what others do, think of what you can do for your mother, who deserves all the love and respect that one can. Mothers can be your friends too if you learn to share things with her. It is just a misunderstanding that they would not understand you or what you want. You can talk about anything with her: sports, cartoons, TV shows, super heroes, general knowledge, etc. You would be pleasantly surprised when you do end up confiding in her or discussing things with her. I am lucky that I get cards and flowers from my family on Mothers Day. But many things remain left to be desired on the other 364 days of the year. Still whatever my children do the rest of the year, I would never stop caring for and loving them. I guess thats what the motherhood is all about. Happy Mothers Day everyone, but make every day Mothers Day, for she never fails to make everyday special for her children. Published in Dawn, Young World, May 9th, 2020 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Indian elections
Description : THE Islamophobic rhetoric being employed by Narendra Modi for this election campaign has become shrill. Pakistan has nearly always been an electoral issue in India. However, this time, it is Indian Muslims who are bearing the brunt of the Indian prime ministers hate speech. Speaking in Rajasthan last month, he called Muslims infiltrators and said they produce too many children. In Gujarat, where, as chief minister, he had overseen the massacre of Muslims in 2002, he accused the Congress of seeking to loot Indias wealth and redistribute it among Muslims, and of organising a vote jihad against his leadership. Later, he accused the Congress and Muslims of stealing Hindu wealth and property.
Modis inflammatory rhetoric was followed by the BJPs campaign video portraying Muslims as outsiders who plundered Indias wealth. As concerns grew about communal violence, the video was removed. These allegations are a sequel to Modis public referencing of earlier conspiracy theories of love jihad (Muslims forcibly converting Hindu women and marrying them to increase the Muslim population) or land jihad (capturing land to construct religious structures and gaining control of Indias territory). Concerns that his rhetoric might incite further violence against Indian Muslims are increasing. Ordinarily, since Hindus are in a majority in India, it may be difficult to question the rationale of creating a Hindu state. However, two observations are in order. One, the expansionist designs of the cherished Hindu state seek the creation of an Akhand Bharat, a Hindu right fantasy, which would violate the territorial integrity of Nepal, Bangladesh, Pakistan, and Afghanistan, as per a map displayed in the new parliament building. This is not acceptable to the aforementioned independent states. Two, though the creation of a Hindu state should not translate into discrimination against minorities, regrettably this will be the case. The works of French political scientist Christophe Jaffrelot illustrate how Muslims, 14.5 per cent of Indias population, are grossly underrepresented in bureaucracy, the judiciary, police, and legislative organs. They are second-class citizens.
The Muslim-majority area of Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmiri is also being subjected to demographic engineering. The destruction of the centuries-old Babri Masjid by Hindu zealots in 1992 and the construction of a temple in its place has set a precedent that might be followed for other historic mosques. This contrasts sharply with the UAEs gesture of permitting a Hindu temple in Abu Dhabi. Modis anti-Muslim rhetoric is raising concerns of violence. Analysts are also pointing out the fascist tendencies of the BJP regime, a steep decline in democratic values, and a departure from the moorings of pluralism and secularism on which modern India was founded. In her book The Incarcerations, Alpa Shah contends that Modis India is using its national security apparatus to incarcerate ordinary citizens for their dissenting views. Commenting on the book, Arundhati Roy stated that this was about criminalisation and incarceration of dissent itself. Strikingly, the Modi regime has also used art and culture to project the Hindutva philosophy. Kunal Purohits book H-Pop: The Secretive World of Hindutva Pop Stars shows how Hindutva pop stars and influencers are being used to spread the message of Hindu supremacy and create acceptance of Hindutvas core beliefs. Apart from this, Modi is playing on his governments accomplishments: making India the worlds fifth largest economy; the construction of 50,000 kilometres of national highways; boosting Indias military spending; building Vikrant, Indias first domestically built aircraft carrier; and the Chandrayaan-3 moon landing. His prospects of winning a third term have been bolstered by a weak opposition. Despite the formation of the Congress-led 37-party INDIA coalition, there is no real challenge. What has bolstered his outreach is Indias enhanced global standing. In his book Why Bharat Matters, S. Jaishankar presents India as a leader of the global south and makes a case for the rejuvenation of India as a civilisational state.
There are some lessons that Pakistan could learn from Indias electoral process. One, despite the large scale of Indias elections (969 million registered voters; 1m polling stations) and the use of electronic voting machines, election results are largely accepted without much ado. Two, there is no caretaker government, as the incumbents become caretakers in a way, and refrain from announcing major policy decisions or sanctioning expenditure for development schemes. If Modi wins a third term, he is likely to maintain his pro-Hindutva, anti-Muslim, and hegemonic attitude towards regional countries, particularly Pakistan. The write is a former foreign secretary and chairman of Sanober Institute Islamabad. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Who can rock the hybrid boat?
Description : A NUMBER of developments over the past week suggest that the establishment is keen to enforce/ maintain the status quo and the only impediment in its path may be an assertive superior judiciary that has been increasingly finding its feet in recent weeks. If jailed PTI leader and former prime minister Imran Khans article in UKs conservative right-wing Telegraph newspaper blaming the military leadership directly for all his woes the week before was not hint enough of the state of play, two public statements by the latter clarified issues rather unambiguously. The first came in the DG ISPRs press briefing, which was ostensibly called to discuss Afghanistan-based terrorist groups involvement in attacks on Chinese nationals working on development projects in the country. But in response to a couple of questions about the PTI and Imran Khan related to the events of May 9 last year, the DG ISPR stated unequivocally that the only path to rehabilitation for the political party and its leaders was to seek forgiveness for attacking your own forces.
Then, perhaps, talks could happen and that too with political parties (ie, the government), as the military had nothing to do with politics. Imran Khan has been consistent in saying he wouldnt talk to the powerless political parties and that a meaningful dialogue is possible only with the military. The DG ISPR also lamented the delay in the prosecution and sentencing of all those responsible for the May mayhem  including the leaders and mastermind against whom irrefutable evidence has been gathered and submitted  and, in doing so, appeared to hint at the establishments frustrations with what it perceives as roadblocks being erected by the judiciary. The content of the live presser evoked an equally adamant response from the PTI, which went on the offensive, reiterating its stance that May 9 was a false flag operation, accusing the militarys spokesman of being economical with the truth, and saying it would be happy to live with the findings of an impartial judicial commission into the May 9 events and would even apologise if found to be at fault. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. The military spokesman had pre-empted this demand in his briefing earlier by saying if a probe were to happen, as was being demanded, it ought to start with 2014, and not nine years later. The 2014 PTI sit-in in the federal capital was said to have been instigated and backed by the then ISI chief. This was the first indication that the military was prepared to hold its own accountable for past follies, if it paved the way for the trials and sentencing of PTI leaders it says were responsible for the attacks on defence installations in a number of cities in Punjab and KP. While the spokesman left nothing to the imagination, on the first anniversary of May 9, the army chief added his voice to his chief spokesmans in terms of stressing the need for punishing the perpetrators of the violence a year earlier, also lashing out against what he called digital terrorism.
This indicates that harsher curbs on social media are planned. So far, the PTI has had overwhelming social media dominance and had been able to keep a step ahead of its adversaries, but we will find out soon whether it has what it takes to bypass software the Chinese have developed over the years (and Pakistan has reportedly acquired) and successfully used to block dissident content. With this ever-widening gulf between the establishment and the party it once saw as a panacea for all that ails Pakistan, the one thing that many felt could force a rethink in the establishment would have been a public manifestation of the immense support enjoyed by the PTI, as evidenced in last Februarys elections. Many Pakistan watchers keenly waited all day for multitudes of PTI supporters to spill out onto the roads and streets of major urban conurbations on the party leaders call to break the shackles and protest on May 9. But the brutal crackdown of the past one year seems to have knocked the wind out of the partys sails and worn down the workers will. People may turn out to vote for it in droves, but did not appear prepared to risk life, limb and liberty in coming out for mass protests. Some small localised protests did happen, but had zero impact in the sense of influencing decision-making in the corridors of power. Going forward, a couple of factors will play a role in steering developments. The first and foremost will be the confidence the army chief has in his control over his institution. His predecessor appointed a dozen major generals to three stars in his final six weeks in office and left the incumbent little room in terms of forming his own team. Natural attrition and the more dramatic exit of a couple of three stars on disciplinary grounds recently has, 18 months down the line, given the chief an opportunity to place senior officers of his own choosing in key roles which will give him greater freedom of action both inside and outside the institution. The promotion of three officers this week, including the DG ISPR, to three stars was another step in that direction. The military saw May 9 as a coup against the chief, a failed attempt to dislodge him from office. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. With the PTI protests failing to gather momentum, the only impediment in his path seems to be an increasingly assertive superior judiciary. It can and will, in all likelihood, challenge the establishments pre-eminence in decision-making. It isnt clear how the latter plans to deal with that, especially because it believes that a direly needed economic revival is only possible under the umbrella of a hybrid set-up and in a relatively calm political environment. Only the judiciary can rock its boat now. The writer is a former editor of Dawn. abbas.nasir@hotmail.com Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Looming pension crisis cries out for corrective measures
Description : Pension reform is again a hot topic, but this time, bureaucrats will make it appear as if it is intended to benefit top officials. The reforms go beyond just raising the retirement age or taxing pensions. Instead, a series of actions, similar to those that were done in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP), should be seriously considered to reduce the cost of pensions to the government exchequer. The national pension cost will reach nearly Rs2 trillion in FY24, and it is predicted to rise to Rs10tr in the next decade if no reforms are implemented. In 2002-03, the pension cost stood at Rs25 billion, but in a span of just 20 years, it skyrocketed to over Rs1.5tr. Pension reforms have previously been tested in KP and generated the expected cost-saving results. It is high time to rationalise the existing pension programme and transition to more modern schemes available in developing and developed countries. Last week, Finance Minister Muhammad Aurangzeb proposed to raise the retirement age from 60 to 65 years. It has sparked controversy over whether the government intends to benefit only a select few individuals. This decision has both advantages and disadvantages. In KP, the age restriction was raised to 63 years in 2019 with a projected annual savings of Rs20bn. However, the decision was reversed due to strong protest from bureaucrats, and the court also overturned the decision. However, KPs other pension reforms remained in effect. KP Advisor on Finance Muzzammil Aslam has a different take on raising the age restriction than his predecessor, who implemented a series of reforms. Mr Aslam believes that the lump sum payment of pension payments will be delayed for the next five years, providing some breathing room for the time being. This will allow the government to show a lower budget deficit. The net impact will increase when the five-year allowances are added to the basic salary, which will be used to pay the pension. The age extension will postpone payments, but total payouts to employees will climb over the following five years. While these efforts provide some relief in the short term, crucial steps must be implemented to address the increasing pension liabilities. The governments liabilities have jumped from Rs25bn in FY03 to Rs2tr in FY24 There is another idea to tax pensions. It may also face political challenges. However, the KP government has imposed a 5pc pension tax on grades 17 and above on their executive allowance. It is estimated that this measure alone will generate Rs150bn in contributions to a pay-as-you-go pension system. This was not an easy decision, but it was made in KP to obtain some contribution from existing employees. The federal government can look into this step in response to opposition to taxing pensions. KP reforms In 2004, based on recommendations from a World Bank project, the India implemented a national pension scheme wherein employee contributions are matched by the government. Pakistan did not choose to adopt it since it was not anticipated that the cost would rise so dramatically over the next 20 years. Taimur Khan Jhagra, former finance minister of KP, took the lead in implementing a series of pension reforms, including the introduction of a contributory pension scheme for new employees beginning July 1, 2022. Few substantial changes were made to the existing pension programme. A well-known 13-tier pension system was in place, covering the pensioners widow, children, parents, siblings, sisters, and grandchildren. KP confined it to direct dependents. The federal government did the same last year, but other provinces have not followed suit. The previous PTI government raised KP and Punjabs minimum retirement age to 55 from 45, reducing KPs pension bill by Rs20bn alone. KP consolidated various pensions into a single one. Previously, individuals could receive two pensions simultaneously, with an active employee receiving both a salary and a pension. The major reform is the implementation of a contributing pension scheme for new employees. Under this programme, the KP government contributes 12pc and employees contribute 10pc. So far, 40,000 staff have been hired under this system starting July 1, 2022. There are additional critical reforms that the KP and federal governments should implement, such as revisiting the single Universal Pay Scale between Grades 1 and 22. Pay in provinces is decoupled from the Centre and between departments, allowing each department to develop a pay scale appropriate for their budget and the market value of their professions. Pension reforms are greatly needed. The question is whether the state will be able to sustain pension payments for the next 10 to 15 years. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : SMOKERS CORNER: KHAN AND THE GENERALS
Description : In May 2023, a recorded phone call  allegedly between the mother-in-law of the former Chief Justice of Pakistan (CJP) Umar Atta Bandial, and the wife of a lawyer-member of Imran Khans populist Pakistan Tehreek-i-Insaf (PTI)  was leaked on social media. In the call, the two ladies can be heard criticising the coalition government made up of the parties that had ousted Khans regime in April 2022 through an act of parliament. At one point in the leaked conversation, the mother-in-law laments, Yeh kambakht martial law bhi tau nahin lagaatay! [These cursed people dont even impose martial law!] Bykambakht,she meant the military establishment (ME). The conversation was surreal on many levels. Khan had been the blue-eyed boy of the ME, until he had a falling out with his makers. From 2011 till he was elected as prime minister in 2018, the ME had successfully shaped Khans political rise in a highly coordinated manner. His popularity was first established within the rank and file of the military. Then, some TV journalists were brought on board, followed by the induction of some vital members of the judiciary.
This troika  the ME, the electronic media and the judiciary  was complimented by the trained social media wing of Khans PTI to proliferate narratives pitched against the two older mainstream parties, the Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) and the Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP). The two were deeply demonised as being corrupt. After his ouster, Imran Khan was convinced that the establishment had betrayed him, and the May 9-10 protests last year were an attempt to rally support amongst pro-Khan factions in the military. However, any military intervention was drastically overestimated by his supporters A constituency that had initially been built by the former military dictator Gen Pervez Musharraf, and which mostly consisted of middle-class and upper-middle-class Pakistanis, was navigated by the ME and the media in such a manner that it eventually fell in Khans lap. This became a quadrilateral elite, comprising the ME, the media, the judiciary and the middle classes. After Khans ouster in April 2022, he began to publicly lambast the ME, accusing it of betraying him. But the truth is, due to the many abject failures of Khans government, the ME had begun to gradually distance itself from him months before he was ousted. In February 2022, Bandial became the CJP. He was cut from the same cloth that at least four of his predecessors were. These included Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry and, even more so, Justice Saqib Nasir, Justice Asif Khosa and Justice Gulzar Ahmad. Anti-PTI parties often accused them of being overtly pro-Khan. Justice Bandial was accused of having a soft corner for Khan. Truth is, Bandial wasnt very good at hiding this soft corner. Now the question is, during the time of the aforementioned phone call leak, when Khan was holding angry rallies and condemning the ME, why was Bandials mother-in-law yearning for a military takeover? Equally surreal was the presence of banners in some pro-Khan rallies with We Want Martial Law written on them. Also, why did the PTI  by planning last years violent riots on May 9 and 10, in which PTI supporters and members attacked military property  believe that this would cause a split in the armed forces and bring pro-Khan generals to power? Many academics who study coups are of the view that, if the conditions allow, street protests can be followed by a coup detat. According to the political scientist Scott A Tyson, protests are often a signal to the elites to intervene.
The elites in this context are the military and political elites. These may also include the higher judiciary and business elites. A regime facing the protests, too, is made up of political elites. Once the anti-regime elites decide that the protests are clearly signalling for an intervention, this is then communicated to the state elites. The media too plays a role in this. Its reporting of the protests may strengthen the signal and galvanise the military to intervene. The mother-in-laws kambakht lament was expressing a desperate yearning within sections of economic elites for military intervention. This nature of signalling was loud and clear on numerous WhatsApp groups when Khan was holding rallies against his ouster. The signal became even more obvious when the We Want Martial Law banners began to appear at the rallies. Some media personnel also started enhancing the signal to the ME. But by late 2022, the MEs top leadership had changed. A general who had earlier exited the project that was set up to facilitate Khans rise became the new army chief. Yet, PTI believed that many remnants of the project were still active within the military. I believe that with the judiciary still in facilitation mode, the notion of causing a split within the military to replace the new military chief with pro-Khan generals was the brainwave of some retired military men who were well-versed in the theories of post-protest coups. Once the signal to intervene in Khans post-ouster rallies was ignored by the new ME, a violent uprising was conceived that was to target the new ME. The uprising was enacted to evoke the concerns of the supposed pro-Khan generals. The signal now was: eject the new army chief and intervene (on the side of Khan) to avoid an all-out civil war. This plan could not have been formulated without the input of some retired officers. Many of them had been quite vocal in their support for Khan.
The violent May 9 and 10 protests were orchestrated by a political elite (PTI) against another set of elites (the coalition government) to signal the need for an intervention to judicial and military elites. But, according to Tyson, whether or not a coup will succeed is generally not certain to elites. This uncertainty is caused by the uncertainty regarding the actions of other elites. The other elite, in the context of the May 9 and 10 riots, was the military. An intervention by pro-Khan officers was drastically overestimated by the planners and the plan collapsed. The coalition government was able to withstand the assault. The new military chief began to swiftly oust the remaining pro-Khan elements from the military  even though those remaining in the judiciary are now trying to avoid suffering a similar fate through a pushback in the name of the independence of the judiciary.This, too, is quite surreal. Published in Dawn, EOS, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : A turbulent 2023
Description : PAKISTAN faced a tumultuous year in 2023 marked by severe economic distress and a sharp erosion of civil liberties. As documented in the HRCPs annual report, the year was nothing short of a human rights crisis on multiple fronts. Economic hardship was pervasive, with back-breaking inflation  nearly 40pc  and low growth hitting the common citizen the hardest. Protests were widespread, ranging from government employees striking against delayed salaries and pension issues to political demonstrations demanding timely elections. The state responded with indifference and sometimes outright violence, underlining its disregard for the peoples constitutional rights. The political arena was no less strained: the year saw unprecedented violence following the arrest of former prime minister Imran Khan; subsequent PTI-led riots were met with harsh government crackdowns. This included mass arrests and the controversial use of military courts for civilian trials. Political dissent was stifled and freedom of speech curtailed with internet shutdowns and media gags on reporting of certain political leaders. Sadly, the governments management of the turmoil involved significant overreach, impacting judicial independence and skewing the electoral landscape. The swift passage of laws granting sweeping powers to intelligence agencies and restricting media freedoms points to the governments alarming propensity to consolidate power at the cost of transparency and accountability.
Human rights violations were not limited to political suppression. The report highlights severe abuses such as enforced disappearances, alleged extrajudicial killings and custodial torture by state agencies. The societal impact of these policies and actions has been devastating. Moreover, marginalised communities, including women, children, religious minorities, and transgender persons, faced increased violence and discrimination. Notable too was the harsh crackdown on peaceful assemblies like the Baloch Yakjehti Councils protests. On the international front, despite engaging with global human rights mechanisms, Pakistans selective adherence to recommendations concerning enforced disappearances and the use of the death penalty reflected a reluctance to fully align with international human rights standards. Rulers would do well to remember that adhering to those standards will help maintain Pakistans desperately needed GSP-Plus status and be a more inviting place for foreign investment.
As the year proceeds, it is imperative for the state to reconsider its approach to human rights. The government must ensure the independence of the judiciary, respect for democratic processes, and protection for all citizens against the abuse of power. Laws that infringe on freedom of expression and assembly should be reviewed and reformed. Additionally, there should be a concerted effort to address the economic inequalities that underpin much of the social unrest. For a stable and prosperous Pakistan, human rights must be more than an ideal; they must be an integral part of governance and everyday life. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Love knows no boundaries at Karachis Edhi Home nursery for special children
Description : KARACHI: Its one day to Mothers Day and the childrens nursery at the Edhi Home in Mithadar is decorated with balloons and posters along with framed photographs of the late couple Abdul Sattar Edhi and Bilquis Edhi. Children in the classrooms are busy making greeting cards, drawing pictures of themselves and the only woman whom they have come to know as their mother, their Chhoti (younger) Mummy Sabah Faisal Edhi. The duties of the busy mother of so many children, including four of her own, starts from early morning. After tending to her own household duties and sending off her youngest, Moosa Edhi, to school, she is in the nursery at 8am sharp, inquiring from the staff there if everyone had a good sleep, if anyone had any issues during the night. It has become a habit with her to visit the nursery first to inquire about her babies before getting to her other work of calling up the other Edhi Homes and Centres, asking about the other children, their health and school progress, asking about the women in their Homes, tending to the marriage proposals, and adoption procedures and planning outings and picnics for the children. When parents discover their babies are not well, they quietly leave them in our cot, says Sabah Edhi as country celebrates Mothers Day today But today, before she can go inside the nursery, she stops in the playroom to admire three-year-old Fatimas greeting her with a broad smile and a happy dance. Chhoti Mummy hugs the child and gestures to know if she has eaten breakfast. Fatima is deaf and mute. She has only recently been fitted with a cochlear implant, which has enabled her to hear and appreciate music to which she loves to dance. It is quite obvious that Sabahs favourite in the nursery is five-year-old Moosa, named by Mummy, Bilquis Edhi, herself, after her own youngest grandson, Sabah and Faisals youngest son Moosa. But this Moosa, even though he is five, doesnt look more than a year old. His growth is stunted. Sabah lifts him out of his cot and cuddles him lovingly. The nursery only has special children or children with learning disabilities. Moosa was the last child here named by Bilquis Edhi. The rest have been given names by their Chhoti Mummy. There are two newborn baby girls, Aimen and Noor Fatima, peacefully sleeping in their cradles in the cheerful blue nursery. Both the babies are blind. The moment some parents discover that all is not well with their babies they quietly leave them in our cot, says Sabah. They never return for them, she sighs. Parents of very sick children, too, disown them even when they know that their child doesnt have much time to live. We take them in, find them the best of medical care till the last of their breath, she adds. On discovering a child in the cot, we first try to get information about who left him or her there followed by a thorough medical check-up. If they are in need of medical care, we make sure that they receive the best that there is. Just the other day, someone left a little girl suffering from diarrhoea. She had to be hospitalised, she informs. Just then one little girl, of about four years of age, who also looks like she is considerably attached to her Chhoti Mummy walks in and runs up to her. She is normal. There is nothing wrong with this one, Sabah says. She says her name is Manahil. We found her near Sohrab Goth. Most of the children in our Sohrab Goth Centre are much older so I brought her here with me until we can find her parents, she informs. By the grace of God, there is no shortage of space, love and care in this Home built for these children by Edhi Sahab and Mummy, she says, kissing the childs head. All children are a blessing, a priceless gift from God. I wish the parents who discard their children like or neglect them would realise this. I wish such parents could love their special, disabled or sick children like they love their normal children, she says. Sometimes, these very children who they love so much because they are normal and healthy grow up to discard their parents when they are old and weak. Thats the story of so many old people in our homes, she concludes. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Documentary on Dr Aafia Siddiqui launched in Karachi
Description : KARACHI: Aafia Siddiqui  The True Story, a documentary by Friends of Aafia, was launched here at the Karachi Press Club (KPC) on Saturday. The documentary shed light on various aspects of the life of Dr Aafia from her birth, education, marriage and to her kidnapping in Karachi and confinement in a notorious US prison.
View this post on Instagram
Aafias sister Dr Fowzia Siddiqui and Muslim Matters Editor-in-chief Hena Zuberi and others spoke at the event. Dr Fowzia said that her sister Dr Aafia was a gifted child, a bright scholar and a loving and caring person. She got a PhD degree in neurosciences from Brandies University of the US and it was her dream to revolutionise education system in Pakistan. In the documentary, human rights lawyer Clive Stafford Smith, who currently represents Dr Aafia, said a vast majority of the American people had no idea who Dr Aafia was and they also did not care.
He said that she has suffered a lot in the US prison and braved all sorts of torture. El-Hajj Mauri Saalakhan, the founding president and director of operations at The Aafia Foundation, told the documentary makers that after 9/11, the US targeted the human rights and liberties of people, especially Muslims. He said Dr Aafia also fell prey to this victimisation and in 2003 she was kidnapped, along with her children, in Karachi and got disappeared on mere suspicion that her husband had bought online night vision goggles. Umme Muhammad, the president of the Musawemem Campaign, said for the last 15 years she had been linked to the case of Dr Aafia but disappointingly nothing more could be achieved.
She said Dr Aafia was targeted only because she was Muslim. Yvonne Ridley was amongst the first investigative journalists who told the world that Dr Aafia was jailed in Afghanistan. Talking about the grey lady prisoner of Bigram jail, she said in those times the US administration would dehumanise the prisoners and the same was done to Dr Aafia. She was wounded by the US soldiers and in injured condition she was brought to the US and tried by a court in a highly biased manner and jailed for long 86 years, which means the rest of her life. Zeina El-Debis, leader of the Friends of Aafia and founder of the Shade of Mercy Foundation, talked about their efforts to get Dr Aafia repatriated on humanitarian grounds. She said the documentary was also a part of such efforts. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Pakistans iCube-Qamar beams back first images from moons orbit
Description : Pakistans inaugural lunar satellite iCube-Qamar on Friday transmitted the first-ever images captured by it from the lunar orbit, the national space agency said. The satellite, part of Chinas Change-6 lunar mission, was launched from the Hainan province on May 3 and had successfully entered the moons orbit at 1:14pm on May 8. The moon is at an average distance of 384,400km from earth. The lunar module was designed by Islamabads Institute of Space Technology (IST) in collaboration with Chinas Shanghai University (SJTU) and Pakistans national space agency Suparco. The landmark images were unveiled at a ceremony organised at the China National Space Agency (CNSA) to mark the successful mission accomplishment, IST spokesperson and head of Department of Electrical and Computer Science, Dr Khurram Khursheed told Dawn.com. They were officially handed over to Pakistans ambassador to Beijing, she added.
View this post on Instagram
One of the first-ever images captured by Pakistans inaugural lunar satellite iCube-Qamar shows the moon and the sun.   Suparco/CNSA
The iCube-Q orbiter carries two optical cameras to image the lunar surface. The module is a cube satellite or cubesat  miniature satellites typically characterised by their small size and standardized cubic design. Due to their compact size and relatively low cost compared to traditional satellites, CubeSats offered opportunities for universities, research institutions and commercial entities to participate in space missions and gather valuable data for scientific advancement and innovation. Operating in extreme temperatures as low as minus 100 degrees Celsius, the satellite features a 7-kilogramme one-megapixel camera tailored for missions with power constraints.
Dr Khursheed had said the satellite would play a critical role in deep space missions. Its surface-level analysis capabilities, transmitting images at a modest 1-kbps, will provide crucial data on crater locations, water, and traces of ice on the moons surface, he had said. As the Chinese lander collects rock and soil samples, iCube-Q will spend three to six months orbiting the moon, capturing and transmitting images of the moon back to Earth. The IST said the opportunity to release the cubesat in lunar orbit from the Change-6 mission was offered by the CNSA through the Asia Pacific Space Cooperation Organisation (Apsco). After a thorough evaluation, Pakistans proposal was accepted out of all Apsco member states.
One of the first-ever images captured by Pakistans inaugural lunar satellite iCube-Qamar shows the sun shining brightly.   Suparco/CNSA
The Change-6 mission, which aims to explore the moons dark side, employs lunar research payloads from multiple countries, including Pakistans iCube-Qamar satellite. The mission is named after the mythical Chinese moon goddess. Nasa is banned by US law from any collaboration, direct or indirect, with China. On Change-6, China is carrying payloads from France, Italy, Sweden and Pakistan, while Change-7 will bear payloads from Russia, Switzerland and Thailand when it launches in 2026.
Change-6 aims to collect around 2kg of lunar samples from the far side of the Moon and bring them back to Earth for analysis. Chinese state news agency Xinhua had hailed it as the first endeavour of its kind in the history of human lunar exploration. China will send a robotic spacecraft in the coming days on a round trip to the moons far side in the first of three technically demanding missions that will pave the way for an inaugural Chinese crewed landing and a base on the lunar south pole. The probe is set to land in the immense South Pole-Aitken Basin, one of the largest known impact craters in the solar system. Once there, it will scoop up lunar soil and rocks, and carry out other experiments in the landing zone. With no direct line of sight with the Earth, Change-6 must rely on a recently deployed relay satellite orbiting the moon during its 53-day mission, including a never-before-attempted ascent from the moons hidden side on its return journey home. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Ruling coalition loses 27 reserved seats in Punjab
Description :  Speaker suspends PML-Ns 23, PPPs two, and one member each of PML-Q, IPP
 Decision announced on point of order raised by PTI-backed SIC leader
 In National Assembly, ruling coalition also likely to lose 23 seats ahead of budget session LAHORE / ISLAMABAD: The ruling coalition in Punjab led by PML-N on Friday lost dozens of reserved seats in the provincial assembly when the speaker suspended 24 women and three minority MPAs elected on reserved seats and barred them from joining the house proceedings. Twenty-three of the suspended MPAs belonged to PML-N, two to PPP and one each to PML-Q and IPP. Speaker Malik Mohammad Ahmed Khan took the decision on a point of order raised a day ago by opposition lawmaker Rana Aftab of PTI-backed Sunni Ittehad Council (SIC) during the house proceedings. The opposition member had argued that the Supreme Court had suspended the decision of the Election Commission of Pakistan (ECP) of allocating the reserved seats of SIC to other parties on the plea that the SIC had neither contested elections nor had submitted a list of nominees for the seats reserved for women and minorities. But Speaker Khan ruled that he had sought opinions of the advocate general as well as the provincial law department and would take a decision only on receiving their reports. Soon after the beginning of house proceedings on Friday, the speaker read out the Supreme Court order and gave the ruling that Rana Aftabs point of order was lawful and suspended the 27 members immediately. When Mr Aftab pointed out that the suspended MPAs had unlawfully voted for the resolution condemning May 9 violence, the chair said he should have raised the issue when the resolution had been put to vote a day ago. The women MPAs suspended were Maqsoodan Bibi, Rubina Nazir, Salma Zahid, Kanwal Nauman, Zeba Ghafoor, Saeeda Samreen Taj, Sheharbano, Amna Parveen, Syed Sumera Ahmed, Uzma Butt, Afshan Hussain, Shagufta Faisal, Nasreen Riaz, Sajida Naveed, Farzana Abbas, Mariya Talal, Tasheen Fawad, Abida Bashir, Saeeda Muzaffar, Faiza Monima, Amera Khan, Samiya Ata, Rahat Afza and Rukhsana Shafiq. The minority MPAs were Tariq Masih Gill, Waseem Anjum, and Basroji. National Assembly After the Supreme Courts decision and the Punjab Assembly speakers action, the ruling coalition in the National Assembly is also set to lose nearly two dozen members ahead of the crucial budget session. President Asif Ali Zardari on Friday summoned the National Assembly session on Monday (May 13) and the SIC members are expected to seek a similar ruling from Speaker Ayaz Sadiq. After allocating reserved seats to the parties in the NA in proportion to the general seats won by them in the Feb 8 elections, the Election Commission of Pakistan (ECP) had withheld the notifications on 23 reserved seats  20 for women and three for minorities  due to the dispute on the allocation of the seats after the decision of the PTI-backed independents to join the SIC. Later, the ECP refused to allocate these seats to the SIC and issued notifications distributing these seats to the parties in the ruling coalition headed by the PML-N. The ECP allocated 15 seats reserved for women to the PML-N, four to PPP and one to the JUI-F. It allocated one seat each reserved for the minorities to the PML-N, the PPP and the MQM-P. As a result, PML-N became the largest party in the NA with 123 seats whereas the tallies of PPP and the JUI-F rose to 73 and 11, respectively. The ECP had also issued notifications on the reserved seats for women and minorities in Punjab and the KP assemblies the same day. The PML-N had initially won a total of 75 general seats and was joined by nine independents. With the allocation of 19 reserved seats for women and four reserved seats for minorities, the number reached 107. However, after the March 5 notifications, the PML-N had been allocated 15 out of the remaining 20 reserved seats for women and one out of the three remaining seats reserved for minorities, taking the partys tally to 123 seats. Likewise, PPP had won 54 general seats and was allocated 12 seats reserved for women and two for minorities. After the allocation of four more seats reserved for women and one for minorities on March 5, the number of the PPP lawmakers is now 73, still fewer than the PTI-backed independents who had joined the SIC hoping to get reserved seats. The MQM-Pakistan has 22 members in the National Assembly, while the number of JUI-F lawmakers had gone up to 11 from seven. The SC decision is expected to have no effect in the composition of the Balochistan Assembly as PTI had not won any seat in the province in the Feb 8 polls. However, in the provincial assembly of Sindh, the two reserved seats for women were given to PPP from the share of the PTI-SIC, which had nine members. KP Assembly The most interesting distribution of reserved seats had been observed in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Assembly, where the PTI-backed independents had won 91 seats compared to just 19 seats secured by all other political parties combined. However, the JUI-F, which could get only seven general seats to stay on top among these political parties, was allocated 10 reserved seats for women. Likewise, the PML-N, which won six general seats, was given eight reserved seats. The PPP, which bagged four general seats, was allocated six reserved seats. The ANP and the PTI-P, which clinched one general seat each, also remained lucky to have their numbers double in the provincial assembly. However, these MPAs in KP Assembly have not yet taken oath as the speaker has refused to call the session. Gwadar killings Meanwhile, the Punjab Assembly during its Fridays sitting adopted a resolution condemning the recent killing of 11 workers belonging to Punjab in Gwadar. The resolution presented by treasury members Amjad Ali Javed demanded the federal government arrest the culprits. It also demanded that the centre announce a compensation package for the heirs of the deceased. South Punjab On a point of order raised by opposition MPA Nadeem Qureshi, Punjab Finance Minister Mujtaba Shuja told the house that the south Punjab secretariat was not being wrapped up; rather the officers who had been promoted were being replaced by new appointments. The minister also rejected the stance that the PML-N was against the development of south Punjab and said that the region had been developed the most when incumbent Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif was the chief minister of Punjab. Published in Dawn, May 11th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : PIA staff forgets to put boys body on plane
Description :
SKARDU: Officials of PIA, the Civil Aviation Authority and police try to placate the protesting father of the deceased.Photo by the writer
GILGIT: In a heart-wrenching incident, a PIA flight from Islamabad to Skardu left behind the body of a six-year-old boy at the capitals airport on Friday, while his parents continued their journey, unaware of the shocking mistake. The parents of the deceased boy were shocked and fainted at Skardu airport when they came to know that their sons body had been left behind in Islamabad. Mujtaba, a resident of Katshi village of Kharmang district, was diagnosed with a tumour at a hospital in Skardu and doctors referred him to Rawalpindi for treatment a month ago. His father Muhammad Askari and mother took him to Rawalpindi and he had been under treatment at Benazir Bhutto Hospital for weeks. Mujtaba lost his life in the hospital on Thursday. The parents decided to transport the body of their child to their native village of Katshi for burial, through a PIA flight on Friday, as a 24-hour-long journey from Islamabad to Skardu by road with the body was not possible due to hot weather. Shocked parents, relatives protest against airline managements negligence at Skardu airport The deceased boys parents and another relative confirmed their tickets at flight PK-451 from Islamabad to Skardu on Friday morning. They brought the body to Islamabad airport at 6am and completed cargo procedure for the body after fulfilling SOPs and airlines rules and made the payment. Ibrahim Asadi, a relative of the deceased boy, told Dawn that the body was scheduled to be transported with the parents to Skardu from Islamabad at 9am. He said the flight was delayed for four hours and left Islamabad at 1pm. Upon arrival at Skardu airport at 2pm, the parents were informed that mistakenly the body was not loaded on the plane and left behind at Islamabad airport. The news sparked grief and outrage as parents were shocked and started crying while the boys mother and father fainted at the airport. The relatives of the boy waiting to receive the body also gathered at the airports lounge and started protest against the PIA managements negligence. It continued for three hours. Officials of PIA, Civil Aviation Authority and other departments, who were on duty at Skardu airport, tried to calm down the boys parents and relatives and admitted their mistake. They assured the parents of bringing back the body on Saturday (today). The PIA officials said the company, which handles cargos at the airport, is responsible for not loading the body and assured the parents that action would be taken against it for negligence. The boys parents and relatives chanted slogans against the PIA administration. They said the poor family had paid higher price to transport the body through the PIA flight, but the airline committed a serious negligence. They appealed to the government to take action against those responsible for the negligence. Yousaf Kamal, another relative of the deceased boy, said the body had deliberately not been loaded on the plane. He said Minister for Kashmir Affairs and Gilgit-Baltistan Engr Amir Muqam was scheduled to fly to Gilgit from Islamabad on Friday, adding that the PIA flight from Islamabad to Gilgit couldnt operate due to the bad weather condition. He said the federal minister had changed his plan and decided to go to Skardu and kept the passengers waiting. He said the flight was scheduled to depart from Islamabad at 9am, but was delayed till 1pm to accommodate the minister, leaving the body behind at the airport. Published in Dawn, May 11th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Downside risks for Pakistan remain exceptionally high: IMF
Description : Downside risks for the economy remain exceptionally high, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) said on Friday in its staff report ahead of the governments talks with the fund on a longer term progamme. An IMF mission is expected to visit the country this month to discuss a new programme, ahead of the government beginning its annual budget-making process for the next financial year. Downside risks remain exceptionally high. While the new government has indicated its intention to continue the SBAs (standby arrangement) policies, political uncertainty remains significant, said the fund in its staff report following the second and final review under the SBA.
The fund added that political complexities and high cost of living could weigh on policy, adding that policy slippages, together with lower external financing, could undermine the narrow path to debt sustainability and place pressure on the exchange rate. The IMF also said higher commodity prices and disruptions to shipping, or tighter global financial conditions, would also adversely affect external stability for the cash-strapped nation. The fund stressed the need for timely post-programme external financing disbursements.
Last month, the country completed a short-term $3 billion programme, which helped stave off sovereign default, but Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif has stressed the need for a fresh, longer term programme. Pakistan narrowly averted default last summer and the economy has stabilised after the completion of the last IMF programme with inflation coming down to around 17 per cent in April from a record high 38pc last May. The country is still dealing with a high fiscal shortfall and while the external account deficit has been controlled through import control mechanisms, it has come at the expense of stagnating growth, which is expected to be around 2pc this year compared to negative growth last year. Pakistan is expected to seek at least $6bn and request additional financing from the Fund under the Resilience and Sustainability Trust. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Pakistan remain unbeaten in Azlan Shah Cup as match with New Zealand ends in tie
Description : Pakistan on Friday secured a tie in their match against New Zealand in the 30th Azlan Shah Hockey Cup. Pakistans fifth match today, which was played in Malaysias Ipoh city at 1pm (PKT), saw them remain unbeaten throughout the tournament. The match ended in a draw, with both teams securing one point each, the Pakistan Hockey Federation (PHF) said.
View this post on Instagram
Senior player Ammad Shakeel is leading the 18-member squad with Abu Bakr as the vice-captain. Japan lead the points table with 13 points while Pakistan rank second with 11 points. New Zealand hold the third position with seven points while Malaysia follow them with a point less.
View this post on Instagram
According to the PHF, both Pakistan and New Zealand had not scored by half-time. New Zealand then succeeded in scoring a field goal in the 35th minute of the game. However, Abu Bakr amassed a goal for Pakistan in the 43rd minute while playing at the penalty corner. Pakistan and Japan had already qualified for the final match, which will take place at 5:30pm (PKT) on Saturday at the Azlan Shah Stadium in Ipoh, after winning their respective matches on Wednesday. Pakistan had defeated Canada 5-4 while Japan beat hosts Malaysia 2-1. According to Radio Pakistan, Pakistan have won their three matches against Malaysia, South Korea and Canada while the ones against Japan and New Zealand ended in a draw. Meanwhile, after their 3-1 victory against Canada today, Japan have four wins plus a draw. Earlier this month, head coach Roelant Oltmans had said he expected an improved show by Pakistan in the tournament. Oltmans, 69, has served Pakistans senior and junior teams in different roles since 2004 and was involved with the youth side in his most recent stint. Pakistan won the Azlan Shah Cup title thrice  in 1999, 2000 and 2003  and came third in the last edition which was also held in Ipoh in 2022. Malaysia are the defending champions of this years edition. Addressing the squad via video link, Information Minister Attaullah Tarar reiterated the governments commitment to hockey while also mentioning a campaign across all forms of media to highlight the teams achievements in the Azlan Shah Cup, according to a report from state-run Radio Pakistan. He added that the prime minister would focus on removing obstacles in the development of hockey in Pakistan. Tara said final would be broadcast nationwide tomorrow on Saturday and wished the team luck. The entire nation is praying for the victory of Pakistan and is looking forward to welcome a champion team. Rana Mashood Ahmed, chairman of the Prime Ministers Youth Programme, also congratulated the team for reaching the final after thirteen years. He added that Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif would also host the team on its return and address issues impeding hockeys development in the country. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Who can rock the hybrid boat?
Description : A NUMBER of developments over the past week suggest that the establishment is keen to enforce/ maintain the status quo and the only impediment in its path may be an assertive superior judiciary that has been increasingly finding its feet in recent weeks. If jailed PTI leader and former prime minister Imran Khans article in UKs conservative right-wing Telegraph newspaper blaming the military leadership directly for all his woes the week before was not hint enough of the state of play, two public statements by the latter clarified issues rather unambiguously. The first came in the DG ISPRs press briefing, which was ostensibly called to discuss Afghanistan-based terrorist groups involvement in attacks on Chinese nationals working on development projects in the country. But in response to a couple of questions about the PTI and Imran Khan related to the events of May 9 last year, the DG ISPR stated unequivocally that the only path to rehabilitation for the political party and its leaders was to seek forgiveness for attacking your own forces.
Then, perhaps, talks could happen and that too with political parties (ie, the government), as the military had nothing to do with politics. Imran Khan has been consistent in saying he wouldnt talk to the powerless political parties and that a meaningful dialogue is possible only with the military. The DG ISPR also lamented the delay in the prosecution and sentencing of all those responsible for the May mayhem  including the leaders and mastermind against whom irrefutable evidence has been gathered and submitted  and, in doing so, appeared to hint at the establishments frustrations with what it perceives as roadblocks being erected by the judiciary. The content of the live presser evoked an equally adamant response from the PTI, which went on the offensive, reiterating its stance that May 9 was a false flag operation, accusing the militarys spokesman of being economical with the truth, and saying it would be happy to live with the findings of an impartial judicial commission into the May 9 events and would even apologise if found to be at fault. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. The military spokesman had pre-empted this demand in his briefing earlier by saying if a probe were to happen, as was being demanded, it ought to start with 2014, and not nine years later. The 2014 PTI sit-in in the federal capital was said to have been instigated and backed by the then ISI chief. This was the first indication that the military was prepared to hold its own accountable for past follies, if it paved the way for the trials and sentencing of PTI leaders it says were responsible for the attacks on defence installations in a number of cities in Punjab and KP. While the spokesman left nothing to the imagination, on the first anniversary of May 9, the army chief added his voice to his chief spokesmans in terms of stressing the need for punishing the perpetrators of the violence a year earlier, also lashing out against what he called digital terrorism.
This indicates that harsher curbs on social media are planned. So far, the PTI has had overwhelming social media dominance and had been able to keep a step ahead of its adversaries, but we will find out soon whether it has what it takes to bypass software the Chinese have developed over the years (and Pakistan has reportedly acquired) and successfully used to block dissident content. With this ever-widening gulf between the establishment and the party it once saw as a panacea for all that ails Pakistan, the one thing that many felt could force a rethink in the establishment would have been a public manifestation of the immense support enjoyed by the PTI, as evidenced in last Februarys elections. Many Pakistan watchers keenly waited all day for multitudes of PTI supporters to spill out onto the roads and streets of major urban conurbations on the party leaders call to break the shackles and protest on May 9. But the brutal crackdown of the past one year seems to have knocked the wind out of the partys sails and worn down the workers will. People may turn out to vote for it in droves, but did not appear prepared to risk life, limb and liberty in coming out for mass protests. Some small localised protests did happen, but had zero impact in the sense of influencing decision-making in the corridors of power. Going forward, a couple of factors will play a role in steering developments. The first and foremost will be the confidence the army chief has in his control over his institution. His predecessor appointed a dozen major generals to three stars in his final six weeks in office and left the incumbent little room in terms of forming his own team. Natural attrition and the more dramatic exit of a couple of three stars on disciplinary grounds recently has, 18 months down the line, given the chief an opportunity to place senior officers of his own choosing in key roles which will give him greater freedom of action both inside and outside the institution. The promotion of three officers this week, including the DG ISPR, to three stars was another step in that direction. The military saw May 9 as a coup against the chief, a failed attempt to dislodge him from office. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. With the PTI protests failing to gather momentum, the only impediment in his path seems to be an increasingly assertive superior judiciary. It can and will, in all likelihood, challenge the establishments pre-eminence in decision-making. It isnt clear how the latter plans to deal with that, especially because it believes that a direly needed economic revival is only possible under the umbrella of a hybrid set-up and in a relatively calm political environment. Only the judiciary can rock its boat now. The writer is a former editor of Dawn. abbas.nasir@hotmail.com Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Insurgency and social change
Description : THE recent killing of seven barbershop workers from Punjab in Gwadar is another indicator that the insurgency in Balochistan is evolving and intensifying demographic changes, which will impact the sociopolitical landscape of the province. Although targeted killings of settlers in Balochistan are not a new trend, the emergence of the Balochistan Liberation Army as the primary insurgent group has significantly increased operational capacities and diversified targets.
While the BLA has not officially claimed responsibility for the Gwadar attack, it is likely the act of one of its wings or affiliate groups. Last month, the group carried out a significant attack, killing nine people from central Punjab who were planning on reaching Europe through Iran. Based on their ethnicity, BLA gunmen abducted them from a bus bound for Taftan and later dumped their bodies under a bridge in a hilly area of Noshki. In a similar attack, possibly by the same gunmen, two people were killed when they tried to escape the assailants cordon on N-40, the Quetta-Noshki highway. Following the Noshki attack, the BLA issued a statement claiming that its special squad had killed agents of Pakistans intelligence agencies who, they claimed, were travelling in plain clothes on the bus. However, media reports and investigations later revealed that the victims were using the Balochistan route to travel to Iran and onward to Europe. Baloch militants view workers and travellers from Punjab as collaborators or agents of security forces or the federal government. Attacks targeting Punjabi workers and settlers have occurred in various parts of the province in the past. It appears that the insurgents kill settlers because they are non-combatants and, as such, easy targets. Militant groups assign such tasks to their new recruits to test their conviction and draw them into the cycle of violence. While one can comprehend Baloch grievances against the state institutions and Punjab, it is also crucial to understand why they target non-combatants who have been serving them for years. Whenever anger flares against the states flawed policies, settlers become the targets. Traditionally, Baloch society has a few key professions. Hairdressing is one of the major ones they miss. Teaching comes next, with teachers from Punjab and the Urdu-speaking community making significant contributions to the education sector in the province. Like tribal codes in other parts of the country, the Baloch follow the tradition of hosting members of different ethnicities without integrating them into their tribal ethics. This is a common practice, as assimilation is a long process. The same applies to settlers from Punjab and urban Sindh, who have embraced the norms of Baloch society, while maintaining ties with their native towns and communities.
However, Punjabis constitute the largest ethnic group in the country and wield significant power and resources, leading to resentment not only among the Baloch, but also Pakhtuns and Sindhis. Whenever anger flares against the establishment and the states flawed policies, settlers become the targets of this animosity. Historically, barbers have been the first victims when such hatred triggers violence. It is worth noting that many of these barbers hail from southern Punjab, much of which identifies itself as Baloch, but their official domicile determines their identity and ethnicity. Over the last two decades, Pakhtuns have captured market businesses in urban Balochistan, while Sindhis have gradually become prominent in the labour market. Despite issues of ethnic and tribal pride and sociocultural differences, there has been no hostility towards these communities. This is because both ethnicities are part of Balochistan and share some cultural commonalities. Moreover, both communities have faced major hostility, apart from minor issues related to ethnic and tribal pride and sociocultural differences. The reasons are that both ethnicities are part of Balochistan and share few other cultural commonalities, but both are also seen as deprived communities and, in the past, have remained part of the political struggle for rights. Insurgencies have no room for neutrality or ambiguity, as insurgents seek clear distinctions between friends and foes. In places like Myanmar and India, ethnic insurgents target civilians from minority ethnic groups, as well as engage in property destruction and other abuses. While small ethnic groups may strive to maintain a neutral stance, they often find themselves between insurgents and counterinsurgents in grey areas. This dynamic is evident among Pakhtuns and Sindhis, who have been targeted by insurgents while working on government projects. The contractors had hired them as an alternative to Punjabi labour, but they were not spared despite a sense of affinity with them.
Sociopolitical transformation is a complex phenomenon, which is influenced not only by insurgents but also by internal societal changes. Baloch society is transforming due to rural-to-urban migration, increasing literacy rates, and improved connectivity. Similar to Karachis experience, urbanisation in Quetta is making other major urban centres multi-ethnic too. Despite ethnic bonds with Sindhis, coexistence with Pakhtuns and Sindhis may face occasional challenges. Additionally, religion presents a growing challenge, as religious fervour increases alongside literacy rates among the Baloch. While this may appear advantageous for state institutions seeking cohesion through religion, religiosity has not weakened Balochistans nationalistic sentiments. The promotion of religious organisations and madressahs by state institutions has failed to make a significant impact, mainly due to the vast disparities within Baloch societys tribal, rural, and urban composition, which foster diverse political interests. The very forces undermining peace are now major power players. At the national level, the provinces poor human development and governance indicators leave ample space for resistance politics. Sociopolitical changes often trigger paradoxical sentiments, with simultaneous pro-development and anti-development attitudes emerging. When the sense of deprivation intensifies, and resource distribution becomes contentious, it creates a conducive environment for militants to recruit, expand, and diversify their targets and tactics. Targeting non-combatants of the majority group reflects a deepening societal anger at this level. This is the most crucial level, as the state has to rethink and correct its approach towards Balochistan. The writer is a security analyst. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : A moral victory
Description : AS the UN General Assembly overwhelmingly voted on Friday in favour of granting Palestine greater rights at the multilateral body, and eventually paving the way for Palestines admission to the UN, thousands of miles away, in the killing fields of Gaza, the people of Palestine continued to face the brutality of the Israeli war machine. Only nine states voted against granting Palestine greater rights, amongst them the US. Americas ambassador to the UN said the vote against the resolution should not reflect its opposition to Palestinian statehood. This is doublespeak at its finest. Israels other staunch Western allies Germany and the UK abstained, while France voted in favour of the resolution along with 142 other members of the UN. The message from the global majority is clear: Palestine must join the comity of nations and take its rightful place at the UN. However, the Security Councils recommendation is essential for full UN membership. Here, the US can be expected to torpedo the move, as it has in the past. However, while Palestine may have scored a moral victory in the hallowed halls of the UN, in the hellscape that Gaza has been turned into, its people have no protection from Israels campaign of genocidal violence. Despite global calls for Tel Aviv to refrain from attacking Rafah, Israel has refused to listen, and hostilities continue in Gazas southernmost area. Even a feeble warning from the US to cut off weapons bound for Tel Aviv has failed to dampen Israels lust for Palestinian blood. Despatches from those in Gaza are heart-breaking. A Unicef official reports witnessing a mass exodus, with people  exhausted, terrified. He particularly points to the challenges faced by pregnant women and children, many of whom have lost limbs and suffered horrific burns. Moreover, famine has spread in Gaza, while Israel has blocked all aid for the last few days. In fact, along with Tel Avivs military machine, many civilians in the Zionist state have displayed blood-curdling cruelty towards the Palestinians, with protesters blocking aid shipments to Gaza. Many Israelis, as a society, want to treat Palestinians as untermensch, not worthy of human dignity, just as their forefathers were treated by Nazi Germany. And thanks to Israels powerful foreign patrons, they are succeeding, as Gazas hungry, bloodied and terrorised people cry out for an end to the nightmare. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : The lethal troika
Description : MANY factors were responsible for the defeat of the erstwhile Soviet Union and then the US in Afghanistan. A common factor was the existence of a combination of extremely resilient militant groups resisting both superpowers. This combination consisted of three categories of militants: local Afghan militants resisting foreign invaders; Pakistani militants crossing over to help their Afghan brethren; and thousands of mujahideen from various countries, particularly in the Middle East, participating in the Afghan jihad. With some variations in their composition, role and external supporters, they fought together against the US and USSR for 30 years, forcing them to withdraw. Alarmingly, after the US withdrawal from Afghanistan in 2021, this Afghanistan-based lethal troika now targets Pakistan. The situation necessitates a fundamental shift in the terrorist threat assessment in Pakistan  from focusing exclusively on the Tehreek-i-Taliban Pakistan to broadening the threat calculus to the troika of the TTP, Afghan Taliban, and Al Qaeda. Concerning the nexus between the Taliban and TTP, the latest UN report on Afghanistan states that the Afghan government was supplying weapons, training facilities and regular financial packages to the TTP. Al Qaedas primary goal, after lying low in the region for many years, is to revive itself without annoying its Afghan hosts or attracting the Wests adverse attention. In view of this, it seems to have opted to carry out its activities in Pakistan through the TTP, while staying below the international radar. The importance Al Qaeda gives to the TTP is evident in that it selected 15 of its commanders to assist the group conduct terrorist attacks in Pakistan. It also supplied armed fighters to the TTP in its attack in Chitral in September 2023, which killed four security officials. Al Qaedas camp in Kunar, headed by Hakim ul Masri, is responsible for training suicide bombers for the TTP. The TTP, which has been the most lethal terrorist group in Pakistan over the last three years, is on the same page with the Taliban and Al Qaeda not only because of an ideological affinity and a shared history of fighting foreign invaders in Afghanistan, but also due to similar goals of Sharia enforcement in Pakistan. The TTP intends to replicate in Pakistan what the Taliban did in Afghanistan. There were reports of the TTP helping the other two members of the troika by killing Taliban members defecting to the rival Islamic State-Khorasan Province in Afghanistan. The basic point is that while the troika is united on targeting Pakistan, the members play different roles. The Taliban are likely to help TTP discreetly in Afghanistan by providing sanctuary, with Al Qaeda supporting both openly in Afghanistan through mentoring and in Pakistan through its sympathisers. With its edge, the TTP is likely to carry out ground attacks in Pakistan and lead a campaign to build up its narrative of violent extremism. As far as the strategy and tactics to be adopted by the troika go, the TTP intends to replicate in Pakistan what the Taliban did in Afghanistan. In a recent interview to Khorasan Diary, TTP ameer Noor Wali Mehsud stated, our jihad in Pakistan  has entered a decisive phase. He went on to say ominously: Pakistani security agencies have unjustly occupied our homeland and our goal is to liberate our homeland and implement the divine law. In a nutshell, the TTP seems to be falling back on the two-point narrative of resistance in Afghanistan, ie, liberation of homeland and enforcement of divine laws. This brings us to the likely impact of the troika on the terrorist threat landscape in Pakistan. Since 2021, the number of terrorist attacks in Pakistan has been consistently increasing every year. This is likely to continue in 2024, with three possible changes. One, the number of Afghan nationals taking part in terrorist attacks in Pakistan may increase  we recall here the suicide bombing against military personnel in 2023 in Bannu by Afghans. Two, given its penchant for high-profile attacks, Al Qaeda may train the TTP to carry out such attacks. Three, given that the top Al Qaeda and Taliban instructors will train TTP members, the quality and sophistication of the attacks in 2024 are likely to be enhanced. Another area likely to be impacted by the troika is infiltration. Earlier, in the 1990s, Al Qaeda infiltrated educational institutions such as Karachi and Punjab universities to recruit educated youth. These recruitment cells in universities may be reactivated. Also, to stay abreast of latest government planning in counterterrorism, the TTP, like the Taliban did in Afghanistan, may attempt to infiltrate government departments, including intel agencies. The third and most important dimension of infiltration is that of the military, which was carried out by Al Qaeda in Pakistan in the late 1990s. It may be pertinent to mention that the last attempted terrorist attack by Al Qaeda was in 2014 in Karachi, when a group of naval officers tried to hijack a navy frigate and crash into a US ship in the open seas. Al Qaeda worked somewhat openly in Pakistan from the 1980s to 2001, and built up an elaborate network of civilian volunteers in many cities of Pakistan, who assisted in collecting funds, recruiting volunteers, and providing hideouts for the group. These sleeper cells might again be contacted by it and reactivated. Similarly, there were some Pakistani militant organisations of the 1980s, like the Harkatul Mujahideen, Lashkar-e-Taiba, etc, sympathetic to Al Qaeda and lying low these days. Al Qaeda may re-establish contact with them and get their support for the TTP. Finally, both the Taliban and Al Qaeda are known for their high-quality propaganda campaign. The TTP media wing lacks that finesse. In the light of guidance from the Taliban and Al Qaeda, we are likely to witness a significant improvement in the quality of propaganda. As Sun Tsu stated, if you know your enemy and you know yourself, you need not fear the result of a hundred battles. Sadly, it seems that Pakistan is erring in assessing the collective capabilities of the TTP, supported by the Taliban and Al Qaeda. The writer is a former police officer who was Nactas first national coordinator. Published in Dawn, May 11th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Education emergency
Description : ON Wednesday, the prime minister announced an education emergency at a conference in Islamabad. Though post-18th Amendment, education has been a provincial subject, the prime minister said that the emergency was for the country and he would work with all provinces and chief ministers to ensure cooperation, compliance and follow-up. Representatives from the provinces were present at the conference. About 26.2 million children between five and 16 years are out of school in the country. For those who are in school, most are provided with a poor quality of education. Access to quality education depends, almost exclusively, on parental income levels: if you have the income, you can get your child a decent quality of education. Otherwise, your child is either not in school, or enrolled in a government or low-fee private school. Most such schools provide poor quality education. Article 25-A, which says that free and compulsory education would be provided to all five- to 16-year-olds in the country, was added to the basic rights section of our Constitution in 2010. Fourteen years later, we are declaring an emergency to do what we had promised our children in the Constitution as a basic right! In an earlier speech, the prime minister had called this criminal negligence. It is surely more than that. The meaning of emergency, according to one dictionary, is a serious, unexpected, and often dangerous situation requiring immediate action. The situation is definitely serious and dangerous as far as the state of education in the country is concerned. But it is not unexpected: it has been the result of decades of a deliberate and purposeful neglect of education. The current situation is the result of the choices that we have made and are still making. Even today, when international bodies recommend a minimum expenditure of four per cent of GDP on education, our government spends 1.7pc or so. The situation is also not unexpected, given that educationists, researchers, academics, civil society representatives, teachers, parents and children who have been talking of this neglect for years have not been heard. Every education policy of the past has also had aspirations to universalise education. We started off in the right direction with the first education conference held in 1947, but we have yet to universalise education. The current situation is the result of the choices that we, as a society, have made and are still making. Given this, the bit on emergencies requiring immediate action is the part that is yet to happen. While announcing the emergency, there was nothing about what steps would be taken to address the situation, what policy changes would take place, and when the state would invest more in education and how. When will all this start? How will it be implemented? Who will monitor the implementation and ensure we move towards the goal of access to quality education for all children, and how do we ensure all this is not just rhetoric and that actual action will indeed follow? The prime minister did say he will be monitoring the situation himself. It is good to have that level of commitment, but given the demands on a prime ministers time, this might not work. It was also mentioned that there will be a task force to look at issues of implementation. The task force, its mandate and power, its modus operandi, have not been announced as yet. Let us see when the follow-up happens. Clearly, a lot of urgent and comprehensive work is needed if we are going to live up to our promises of providing access to quality education to all our children. If it takes the cloak of an emergency to do it, so be it. But the proof will be in the actions that start now, and in outcomes that are achieved as a result. Otherwise, it is all rhetoric and it will be another opportunity wasted. There might not be one programme that all the governments follow. Given the varied conditions and circumstances across the provinces and the Islamabad Capital Territory, if governments have their own priorities in line with local conditions, this is not an issue. In fact, it is better this way, as local programming will create local buy-in as well. But there has to be a clear declaration of priorities by all governments and, subsequently, the action plans they will follow. Pakistan has some 100,000 schools in the public sector and more than 250,000 in total. Similarly, we have about 1m teachers in the public sector, and more than 2m teachers overall working in the education sector. We are still short of schools as well as teachers. So, we are talking of a very large system here. Reform of a large system or change in a large system will require large and deep interventions. Small initiatives here and there, as governments have been taking in education for quite some time, are not going to be enough to address the issue of 26.2m out-of-school children or the quality of education issues for the millions who are in schools. We need more schools, teachers and classes; we need to revamp our assessment and examination systems; we need to redo our curricula and books; we need to upgrade teaching skills and content knowledge of teachers; we need better governance structures in the public sector. All this and more needs to be done at scale and quickly. This will require more resources and it will require a lot of focus on prioritising and coordinating. And it will need high levels of competence as well. By invoking an emergency, the prime minister has said he is putting his weight behind all this. Let us see if this is anything more than rhetoric. The writer is a senior research fellow at the Institute of Development and Economic Alternatives, and an associate professor of economics at Lums. Published in Dawn, May 10th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Lender endorses status quo in SBPs policy rate
Description : KARACHI: The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has endorsed the State Bank of Pakistans (SBP) decision to keep the interest rate unchanged despite a sharp deceleration in inflation. The IMF-Pakistan SBA (2nd and Final Review) Country Report made it clear that the Fund was willing to see no change in the interest rate despite demand from the stakeholders in the wake of falling inflation, which has widened the gap between the 22 per cent interest rate and expected 13 to 15pc estimated CPI in May. The IMF staff endorsed the SBPs Monetary Policy Committee decision to maintain the policy rate, said the report. It is believed that the unprecedented interest rate has crippled economic growth, which is estimated to expand at 2pc in FY24 after contracting in FY23.  Most analysts and research houses believe that inflation in May is likely to be between 13 and 15pc, providing enough room to bring down the interest rate. However, the IMFs endorsement of SBPs decision to maintain a status quo indicates that it may be kept steady despite an expected gap of about 7 to 9pc between inflation and the policy rate.  The IMF report further said that any relaxation of the policy stance should be justified by evidence of declining inflation, controlled pass-through effects, and limited exchange rate pressures from forex market normalisation. The authorities remain committed to a flexible exchange rate and transparent interbank FX market, said the report. The IMF recommended the continued proactive accumulation of reserves through interbank purchases, noting positively that the reduction of the SBPs swap/forward position has alleviated forward premia compression, said the report. The IMF also cautioned that the recent stability of the rupee should not lead to expectations of its persistence in the future. Reforms for the sustainability of the power sector require solid cost-side reforms. The authorities need to speed up work on improving transmission and distribution infrastructure, Discos performance via privatisation or long-term management concession, moving captive demand to the national grid, revisiting terms of PPA where feasible, and converting Power Holding Private Ltd debt into cheaper public debt. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Fight till the last ball, PCB chief tells cricket team in Dublin
Description : Pakistan Cricket Board (PCB) Chairman Mohsin Naqvi on Sunday told the national team to fight till the last ball ahead of the second match of a three-match T20 series against Ireland. As he met players of the mens national team in the Irish capital of Dublin, the PCB quoted him as saying: Fight till the last ball; the competition should be apparent.
On Friday, Ireland recorded their maiden T20 win against Pakistan who could not defend a solid-looking 182-5 after being put in to bat first, dealing a shocking blow to the Babar Azam-led sides preparations for the World Cup, which is taking place next month in the United States. The loss to Ireland, who are in Pakistans group in the T20 World Cup, came after a series draw on home soil to a New Zealand squad missing most of their first-choice players. With Babar only recently reinstated as captain, it was another bump in the road for their tournament preparation.
Todays match will start at 7pm, with Ireland leading the series by 1-0. In a post on X, the PCB shared a video of Naqvi meeting the Green Shirts and speaking to them, adding that a detailed discussion on the action plan took place during the two-hour-long meetup. Encouraging the team, the PCB chairman urged the players to play with hard work, passion and a professional approach. He noted that T20 cricket needed a unique and aggressive approach, adding that victory was only possible if cricket was played in a modern manner. An action plan can be formulated while sitting in a room but the real test is on the ground, where the performance should be visible, the PCB quoted him as telling the team. Naqvi praised all players as undoubtedly talented, professional and the best, adding that the teams bowling attack was splendid. However, he emphasised that great attention was required when fielding so that the opponent cannot get any chance to score. The players are the hope for Pakistan and you have to meet the nations expectations. Teamwork is the fundamental thing for victory, the PCB chairman said. He noted that the public loved cricket and had expectations from the team. Naqvi said that success would come if all 11 of the players in the team performed with unity. No one is accepting the loss in the first match against Ireland. The real test after Ireland and England is the World Cup, he added. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : FOOTBALL: GIRLS KICKING MOUNTAINS
Description : The ground faces the barren mountains of Quetta in Hazara Town  it feels like an otherworldly place, one where seeing girls in public is a common sight. The girls warm up for their football match under the infinite blue sky on a Sunday morning. Wearing black, beige and pink scarves and shorts with leggings, the players are enthusiastic and ready to play. As the match begins, the atmosphere charges up  someone kicks the football, another teammate shouts an instruction, theres a cheer here and a sigh there  and soon theres a goal to great celebration! These were scenes from the Womens Football Academy when Eos visited  it is one of the only three football academies for women in Hazara Town, Quetta, according to Zahra Afzal, the founder. Zahra, 26, started playing football professionally five years ago. She has played football championships in Karachi and was also a part of the Under-18 team in the National Games. A sports aficionado and a bronze medalist in lawn tennis, Zahra also plays badminton, hockey and cricket. But football is her favourite.  Zahra Afzal runs the Womens Football Academy in Hazara Town, Quetta. What made her get into such an apparently thankless job? Once you start playing football, you forget all other games, she tells Eos. Although her passion for football began in childhood, she couldnt play professionally because of a lack of football academies for women in Hazara Town. After graduating from Sardar Bahadur Khan Womens University with a degree in media sciences, Zahra started working as a coordinator in the Aria Institute of Medical Science and decided to start her own academy. It has not been easy for Zahra to start an academy in Quetta, especially in Hazara Town. Theres no government support, especially for the womens team. There are no sponsors here, unlike in the big cities, such as Karachi and Lahore, she shares, adding that, even after two years of starting out, they still have no sponsors.  With a lack of support, Zahra deals with the logistics of keeping the academy running on her own. The ground rent is expensive  it costs 800 rupees per hour, she points out. We use the ground daily for two hours. Theres a monthly fee of Rs500 charged from the players, but for those who cannot afford to pay, especially orphans, the fee is exempted. The day starts early for the players  they train for two hours every day from 6am to 8am. Sundays are match days. Almost 35 girls train at Zahras academy  most of them are studying in government schools and are children of Afghan immigrants. When news of the governments plans to deport Afghan refugees started circulating, many of the players stopped attending training. Their families would ask them to not go, fearing that theyd be picked up and deported, Zahra shares. She adds that two of her best players dropped out due to these fears. Sakina Nazari, 17, wasnt interested in football three months ago but now she dreams of pursuing a career in football. She was persuaded by a friend, who trains at the same academy, to start playing. Football is like therapy and is also good for fitness, Sakina tells Eos. I get a nice feeling when I play  it feels as if I have some control over something. When I wasnt playing football and stayed at home, I would have a general sense of lethargy, but since I started playing, I feel healthy. Sakinas comments about football being therapeutic resonate with many Hazara girls. In recent years, football has emerged as a game-changer for Hazara girls, as it offers solace to the persecuted-community.  For a long time, the Hazaras have been discriminated against, targeted by attacks and killed in bombings. In the last 14 years, more than 2,000 Hazaras have been reportedly killed, according to areportpublished by the National Commission of Human Rights Pakistan. As a Hazara I might not be able to make it far in football due to discrimination and lack of opportunities for our community, but I still want to give sports my best. We should be judged solely on the basis of our talent, she adds. While her family has been supportive, Sakina says society in general is very close-minded. When we go out in our tracksuits, we get weird glares and are subjected to judgement. Sometimes resistance comes from families too. In such cases, Zahra conducts meetings with the parents to convince them to allow their girls to play. Zahra shares that her vision is to not only train the girls in football but also to train them for life, so that theyre ready to face any challenge. Players from her academy have travelled to different cities and out of town for tournaments  an experience that has added to their confidence. More than the training, these events help them grow. The 34th National Games of Pakistan were hosted by Quetta last year and some six players from Zahras academy were selected to represent Balochistan. Aliya Shuja, 19, said she wants the government to invest in football. Its an important sport thats played internationally. We have so far only been focused on investing in and promoting cricket, she points out.  If the government would promote football, the youth would not go for drugs or bad deeds, she says, adding that they just need support and facilities from the government and are willing to pay a fee to train on government-supported grounds that have world-class training facilities. Aliya has been playing football for a long time but has been training at the academy for a month now. Her favourite football team is FC Barcelona and she looks up to Alexia Putellas, a Spanish footballer. I want to play in international leagues and make a career out of football, she says.  Dua Zahra, 15, was inspired by her father, a football coach. I want to be a keeper and my dad trained me at home, shares Dua, who has been playing at the academy for a year now.  Although her father is supportive of her dreams to pursue football as a career, her paternal grandmother often tells her football is not for girls. I just ignore what she says and continue playing, says Dua giggling. The writer is a freelance journalist.
X: @sommulbaloch Published in Dawn, EOS, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Situation in AJK calms down after 2 days of violent clashes
Description : Following violent clashes over the last 48 hours, which left a policeman dead, the situation in Muzaffarabad seemed to have calmed down on Sunday, with a Rangers detachment that was sent to Azad Jammu and Kashmir (AJK) from Kohala having been withdrawn. AJK witnessed violent clashes between the police and activists of a rights movement amid a wheel-jam and shutter-down strike across the territory on Friday and Saturday, which left at least one police official dead and more than 90 others injured, officials told Dawn.com on Saturday. Mirpur Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP) Kamran Ali had said that Sub-inspector Adnan Qureshi succumbed to a gunshot wound in the chest in the town of Islamgarh, where he was deployed to stop a rally for Muzaffarabad under the banner of the Jammu Kashmir Joint Awami Action Committee (JAAC). The JAAC, which has traders at the forefront in most parts of the state, has been seeking the provision of electricity as per hydropower generation cost in AJK, subsidised wheat flour and an end to the privileges of the elite class. They called for the strike following the arrest of at least 70 of their members in raids on Thursday. Reports emerged in the wake of the protests on Sunday that three Rangers battalions had entered the territory through Kohala and were awaiting further orders. However, AJK Minister for Rural Development Faisal Mumtaz Rathore confirmed that the Rangers, due to the intervention of President Asif Zardari, were called back as soon as they entered Azad Kashmir since the situation had calmed down. Meanwhile, in Islamabad, former prime minister of AJK Sardar Abdul Qayyum Niazi slammed the deployment, calling it a drama and an attempt to score political points. First they send them, then call them back, what is this? the ex-AJK PM said. Those fighting for their rights and engaging in protest are free to do so, but they must remain peaceful, Niazi said in a press conference. He added that they (the protestors) must not give the enemy a chance to sow discord within the territory and create infighting. In a post on Facebook, Rathore acknowledged the public demands for cheap electricity, but admitted that addressing them was out of his hands. The big demand of the people, the demand for cheap electricity and the end of loadshedding, falls under the jurisdiction of the Government of Pakistan, Rathore said. Urging the public to remain peaceful, he said, In this one year [I have been in office], I have never been against the right to peaceful protest and [never] supported violence against people. In the aftermath of the protests, JAAC leader Shaukat Nawaz Mir reiterated that the committee is a peaceful organisation and willing to negotiate with the authorities to ensure the provision of cheap electricity and cheap flour. He also appreciated the withdrawal of the Rangers from the area. We have planned another shutter-down strike, he told reporters on Sunday. We have been peaceful for the last year and always will be a peaceful movement. This territory and its institutions and police are our own. Mir maintained that the JAAC is advocating for the rights of the public in AJK, but it is the bureaucrats who do not understand the publics needs that are doing the damage. The JAAC is peaceful and open to negotiations, Mir added, requesting to be notified by the authorities about decisions taken. We do not want to hurt anyone. He also slammed the federal government for not cutting down spending while at the same time claiming they have no room in the budget to subsidise electricity or flour. The government claims they cant provide cheap electricity and flour because they have no budget, but they have the money for watches and cars, Mir said, adding that the federal government and the prime minister should be ashamed. I dont want my forum to be controversial, Mir said. We are made up of respectable politicians  the local council is standing with us. The JAAC leader added that the movement was successful since members of multiple parties and councils are on our side. Our nation is conscious now. There is no politics here, we just want our rights and identity. Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif has taken notice of the situation in AJK and urged PML-N leadership and AJK prime minister Chaudhry Anwar-ul-Haq to pursue negotiations with the JAAC. Posting on X, he said, While debate, discussion and peaceful protests are the beauties of democracy, there should be absolutely no tolerance for taking the law in ones own hands and damaging government properties. He added that amidst situations of chaos and dissent, there will always be people who rush in to score political points.
The prime minister said that he was in contact with PML-N leaders and the AJK government, urging them to talk to the JAAC and resort to [a] peaceful course of action for resolution of their (JAACs) demands. Shehbaz added that despite the efforts of detractors, the issue will be resolved soon. PML-N leader Rana Sanaullah, adviser to the prime minister on political and public affairs, said that the situation in AJK had been mishandled and that the damage could have been mitigated, had both parties chosen the path of negotiation in the first place. Speaking on Geo News programme Naya Pakistan, he said, This situation was mishandled. The PM has called the JAAC to the table with respect. If this had happened earlier, it would have been better and the damage would not have been done. Sanaullah said that people wanted to march to Muzaffarabad, but expressed faith that the government and the JAAC would resolve the matter through negotiations, thus rendering the planned marches redundant. When asked about the JAACs demands, he said, Demands need to be discussed and cannot be granted at face value. There are some demands that we cannot constitutionally fulfill, and some that are financially complicated. This is why we need to sit down and talk, to see what is possible. The ex-minister added that the government will consider requests that are feasible and possible. This is a law and order situation, not a political one. The AJK assembly is competent and its members have the ability to bring about a change, Sanaullah said. President Asif Ali Zardari said all stakeholders should show patience and try to resolve the issues through dialogue and mutual consultation. While meeting a PPP delegation from the AJK legislative assembly, the president said that political parties, the establishment and the people have to act responsibly so the hostile elements cannot take advantage of the situation.
A delegation of members of the Azad Jammu and Kashmir Legislative Assembly, belonging to Pakistan Peoples Party Parliamentarians, called on President Asif Ali Zardari, at Aiwan-e-Sadr, on May 12.Photo courtesy: PID
The demands of the people of Azad Jammu and Kashmir must be met according to law, Zardari said, adding that he would talk to Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif to find a solution. He said that the socio-economic development of the region should be given priority including health, education, tourism and infrastructure. The president emphasised the need to bring remote areas at par with other developed areas of the country, expressing regret over the current situation in AJK. The president also expressed his condolences on the tragic death of the policeman and prayed for the speedy recovery of all those injured. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Heros welcome for hockey team in Lahore after winning silver medal in Azlan Shah Cup
Description : The Pakistan hockey team was given a heros welcome on their arrival in Lahore on Sunday following their silver medal finish at the Sultan Azlan Shah Cup, where they narrowly lost in the final to a defensively stoic Japanese side on penalties. Pakistan remained unbeaten en route to the final but were left ruing their missed opportunities in the final where Japan came from behind and floored them in a penalty shootout.
Japan had taken an early lead but Roelant Oltmans side came back strongly with two goals in three minutes, only to relinquish their advantage before falling apart in the shootout. Upon arrival at Lahore, the team was greeted by a huge crowd, who presented the silver medalists with garlands and bouquets at the airport. Some fans were also seen holding placards and banners congratulating the team for their achievement against all odds. The hockey team was greeted at the airport by Chairman Prime Minister Youth Program Rana Mashhood, former Pakistan head coach Khawaja Junaid, HEC Director Javed Memon, former Olympian Akhtar Rasool, Shahbaz Senior and their family members. Upon the teams return, Rana Mashhood said that Pakistans youth had reconnected with the national sport due to the performance of the hockey side. We lost the match on penalty strokes otherwise these boys were unbeaten, he said adding that the future of the sport had revived in the country. Mashhood also announced a prize of Rs1 million to each player on behalf of the premier, adding that the prime minister will meet the national team at Prime Ministers House. The government of Pakistan will support them in future events, and the premier has called them over to PM House. Their services and efforts will be appreciated and rewarded accordingly, he said. In a closely fought final a day before, Japan dominated early on with quick attacking moves and got their reward in the 12th minute when Seren Tanaka made the breakthrough. Pakistan sprang into action and started the second half with more purpose, probing the Japanese defence. Ajaz Ahmed found the leveller when he was the quickest to react to a rebound in the 34th minute and Pakistan were celebrating again soon after when Abdul Rehman put the ball through the goalkeepers legs to give his side the lead. The twin strikes seemed to have rocked Japan but they regained their composure and Kazumasa Matsumotos effort brought parity with 13 minutes to go. It set up an interesting finale as both sides pressed for the winner, only to see the match go down to penalties. After the final had ended 2-2 in regulation time, Japan prevailed 4-1 in the shootout for their maiden Azlan Shah Cup crown. Roelant Oltmans said his side should have won the match in normal playing time. There were so many opportunities for us to get back and increase the score in our favour. In the first half we did great and also in the second half we created so many opportunities, he told reporters after the game. Pakistans next feature at the FIH Nations Cup in Poland begins later this month, and Oltmans said he hopes his side can go one better at the upcoming tournament. If you are in the final you must win the final, he added. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : IMF mission to meet Pakistani authorities next week to discuss next phase of engagement: official
Description : An International Monetary Fund (IMF) mission will meet Pakistani authorities next week to discuss the next phase of engagement, an official from the international money lender said on Sunday. Speaking to Dawn.com, Esther Perez Ruiz, the Funds resident representative for Pakistan, said: A mission team led by Nathan Porter, IMFs mission chief to Pakistan, will meet with authorities next week to discuss the next phase of engagement. The aim is to lay the foundation for better governance and stronger, more inclusive, and resilient economic growth that will benefit all Pakistanis, she added. Pakistan last month completed a short-term $3 billion programme, which helped stave off sovereign default, but the government has stressed the need for a fresh, longer-term programme. Last week, the Fund said that a mission was expected to visit Pakistan this month to discuss the FY25 budget, policies, and reforms under a potential new programme for the welfare of all Pakistanis. Pakistan narrowly averted default last summer, and the $350bn economy has stabilised after the completion of the last IMF programme, with inflation coming down to around 17 per cent in April from a record high 38pc last May. The country is still dealing with a high fiscal shortfall and while the external account deficit has been controlled through import control mechanisms, it has come at the expense of stagnating growth, which is expected to be around 2pc this year compared to negative growth last year. Pakistan is expected to seek at least $6bn and request additional financing from the Fund under the Resilience and Sustainability Trust. On Friday, the Fund said that downside risks for the economy remain exceptionally high. Downside risks remain exceptionally high. While the new government has indicated its intention to continue the SBAs (standby arrangement) policies, political uncertainty remains significant, said the IMF in its staff report following the second and final review under the standby agreement. The Fund added that political complexities and high cost of living could weigh on policy, adding that policy slippages, together with lower external financing, could undermine the narrow path to debt sustainability and place pressure on the exchange rate. The IMF also said higher commodity prices and disruptions to shipping, or tighter global financial conditions, would also adversely affect external stability for the cash-strapped nation. The fund stressed the need for timely post-programme external financing disbursements. Additional input from Reuters Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : No such thing as strategic state-owned enterprises, says Finance Minister Aurangzeb
Description : Finance Minister Muhammad Aurangzeb on Sunday said that there was no such thing as strategic state-owned enterprises (SOEs) as he stressed the need for privatisation. He made the remarks at a pre-budget conference in Lahore, two days after  Deputy Prime Minister Ishaq Dar said the government would limit its business only to strategic and essential SOEs under its domain but their number would be reduced from 40 after scrutiny. Chairing the Cabinet Committee on Privatisation (CCoP) meeting, which was attended by the finance minister, Dar said privatisation of loss-making SOEs would be a priority. The meeting noted that 40 SOEs were currently categorised as strategic or essential, but respective ministries would submit their details to the Cabinet Committee on State-Owned Enterprises (CCoSOE). The CCoSOE will determine the status of the SOEs to be categorised as strategic or essential entities. Speaking on Sunday, Aurangzeb said: There is no such as [a] strategic SOE. Talking about the meeting chaired by Dar on Friday, he continued, We are absolutely on the same wavelength  that there is no such thing as a strategic SOE. The finance minister said that a meeting would be held tomorrow where we will go back to various ministries and say that all this should be handed over to the private sector. There will be public-private partnership and we will accelerate the privatisation agenda, he said. Commenting on concerns regarding the privatisation of Pakistan International Airlines (PIA), Aurangzeb said the government was not just looking at foreign investors. They are local and foreign investors who are bidding [] there is no such thing that we are only looking at foreign investors, he said. Commenting on a fresh loan programme with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) programme, he said that a larger and longer programme was needed to bring permanence in macroeconomic stability and structural reforms. He also talked about energy reforms, saying that there were leakages and stressed the need for stopping theft. He said that changes were being brought to the boards of distribution companies (Discos) in order to bring in those from the private sector for better corporate governance. And then you will see how we bring those Discos towards concessions or privatisation or a combination of both, he emphasised. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Fight till the last ball, PCB chief tells cricket team in Dublin
Description : Pakistan Cricket Board (PCB) Chairman Mohsin Naqvi on Sunday told the national team to fight till the last ball ahead of the second match of a three-match T20 series against Ireland. As he met players of the mens national team in the Irish capital of Dublin, the PCB quoted him as saying: Fight till the last ball; the competition should be apparent.
On Friday, Ireland recorded their maiden T20 win against Pakistan who could not defend a solid-looking 182-5 after being put in to bat first, dealing a shocking blow to the Babar Azam-led sides preparations for the World Cup, which is taking place next month in the United States. The loss to Ireland, who are in Pakistans group in the T20 World Cup, came after a series draw on home soil to a New Zealand squad missing most of their first-choice players. With Babar only recently reinstated as captain, it was another bump in the road for their tournament preparation.
Todays match will start at 7pm, with Ireland leading the series by 1-0. In a post on X, the PCB shared a video of Naqvi meeting the Green Shirts and speaking to them, adding that a detailed discussion on the action plan took place during the two-hour-long meetup. Encouraging the team, the PCB chairman urged the players to play with hard work, passion and a professional approach. He noted that T20 cricket needed a unique and aggressive approach, adding that victory was only possible if cricket was played in a modern manner. An action plan can be formulated while sitting in a room but the real test is on the ground, where the performance should be visible, the PCB quoted him as telling the team. Naqvi praised all players as undoubtedly talented, professional and the best, adding that the teams bowling attack was splendid. However, he emphasised that great attention was required when fielding so that the opponent cannot get any chance to score. The players are the hope for Pakistan and you have to meet the nations expectations. Teamwork is the fundamental thing for victory, the PCB chairman said. He noted that the public loved cricket and had expectations from the team. Naqvi said that success would come if all 11 of the players in the team performed with unity. No one is accepting the loss in the first match against Ireland. The real test after Ireland and England is the World Cup, he added. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Canada arrests fourth Indian national in killing of Sikh activist
Description : A fourth Indian national was charged by Canadian authorities on Saturday in the 2023 killing of a separatist Sikh leader in Vancouver. Amandeep Singh, 22, was already being held for unrelated gun charges before being charged with first-degree murder and conspiracy to commit murder in the slaying of Hardeep Singh Nijjar. Three other Indian nationals were arrested this month. The killing sparked a diplomatic row between Ottawa and New Delhi when Prime Minister Justin Trudeau linked Indian intelligence to the killing. Nijjar  who immigrated to Canada in 1997 and became a citizen in 2015  had advocated for a separate Sikh state, known as Khalistan, carved out of India. He had been wanted by Indian authorities for alleged terrorism and conspiracy to commit murder  allegations he denied. He was shot dead on June 18, 2023, by masked assailants in the parking lot of the Sikh temple he led in suburban Vancouver. Trudeau announced several months later that Canada had credible allegations connecting Indian intelligence to the slaying. India dismissed the allegations as absurd and responded furiously, briefly curbing visas for Canadians and forcing Ottawa to withdraw diplomats. In November, the US Justice Department charged an Indian citizen living in the Czech Republic with allegedly plotting a similar assassination attempt on American soil. Prosecutors said in unsealed court documents that an Indian government official was also involved in the planning. The shock allegations came after US President Joe Biden hosted Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi for a rare state visit, as Washington seeks closer ties with India against Chinas growing influence. US intelligence agencies have assessed that the plot on American soil was approved by Indias top spy official at the time, Samant Goel, the Washington Post reported in April. Canada is home to some 770,000 Sikhs, who make up about two per cent of the countrys population, with a vocal minority calling for an independent state of Khalistan. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Second night of auroras seen amid extreme solar storm
Description : Auroras lit up skies across swaths of the planet for the second night in a row on Saturday, after already dazzling Earthlings from the United States to Tasmania to the Bahamas the day before. A powerful solar storm  which could continue into Sunday  has triggered spectacular celestial shows usually confined to the far northern reaches of the planet, hence their nickname of the northern lights. I have the sensation of living through a historic night in France [] It was really charged, with solar particles and emotions, Eric Lagadec, an astrophysicist at the Observatoire de Cote dAzur, wrote on social media after the first night. Find good spots, away from the lights, with a clear view to the north! Late on Saturday evening, pictures again started trickling onto social media as people in the United States reported sightings, though not as strong as Friday nights. The first of several coronal mass ejections (CMEs)  expulsions of plasma and magnetic fields from the Sun   came just after 4pm GMT on Friday, according to the US-based National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA)s Space Weather Prediction Center (SWPC). It was later upgraded to an extreme geomagnetic storm   the first since the Halloween Storms of October 2003 that caused blackouts in Sweden and damaged power infrastructure in South Africa. Fridays storm was listed as hitting level five geomagnetic conditions  the highest on the scale. Saturday saw G3 to G5 conditions, with G4 or higher conditions predicted Sunday and G3 conditions possible into Monday. But no major disruptions to power or communications networks appear to have been reported this time around, despite initial worries from authorities. There have only been preliminary reports of power grid irregularities, degradation to high-frequency communications, GPS and possibly satellite navigation, the SWPC said. Elon Musk, whose Starlink satellite internet operator has some 5,000 satellites in low Earth orbit, said his satellites were under a lot of pressure, but holding up so far. However Chinas National Centre for Space Weather issued a red alert on Saturday morning, warning the storm will impact communications and navigation in most areas of the country, state news agency Xinhua reported. Auroras were visible in the northern half of the country, according to media reports. Excitement over the phenomenon   and otherworldly photos of pink, green and purple night skies   popped up across the world, from Mont Saint-Michel on the French coast to Payette, Idaho  in the western United States  to Australias island state of Tasmania.
People pose for photos as a geomagnetic storm lights up the night sky above the Bonneville Salt Flats on May 10 in Wendover, Utah.  AFP
Unlike solar flares, which travel at the speed of light and reach Earth in around eight minutes, CMEs travel at a more sedate pace, with officials putting the current average at 800 kilometres per second. The CMEs emanated from a massive sunspot cluster that is 17 times wider than our planet. People with eclipse glasses can also look for the sunspot cluster during the day. The Sun is approaching the peak of an 11-year cycle that brings heightened activity. NOAAs Brent Gordon encouraged the public to try to capture the night sky with phone cameras even if they couldnt see auroras with their naked eyes. Youd be amazed at what you see in that picture versus what you see with your eyes. Fluctuating magnetic fields associated with geomagnetic storms induce currents in long wires, including power lines, which can potentially lead to blackouts. Long pipelines can also become electrified, leading to engineering problems. Spacecraft are also at risk from high doses of radiation, although the atmosphere prevents this from reaching Earth. NASA has a dedicated team looking into astronaut safety and can ask astronauts on the International Space Station to move to places within the outpost that are better shielded. Even pigeons and other species that have internal biological compasses could be affected. Pigeon handlers have noted a reduction in birds coming home during geomagnetic storms, according to NASAs Jet Propulsion Laboratory. The most powerful geomagnetic storm in recorded history, known as the Carrington Event after British astronomer Richard Carrington, occurred in September 1859. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : ADB links support with IMFs clean chit
Description :   Given my interactions with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the dialogue decisiveness of the current government, I feel very hopeful that there will be a successor programme from the Fund, said the Asian Development Banks (ADB) Country Director for Pakistan Yong Ye in an exclusive interview on the sidelines of ADBs 57th Annual Meeting in Tbilisi this week. Tacitly indicating that support from ADB would only be possible with a clean chit from the Fund, Mr Ye expressed cautious optimism for the economy. Highlighting the uncertainties from last year, Mr Ye termed the IMF agreement announced in June as a miracle. Since then, however, he said, the caretaker government did a good job stabilising the economy under the Funds Stand-By Arrangement. More importantly, he added, with the IMF agreement in place, the central banks foreign exchange reserves increased from $4.4 billion to over $9bn in the week ending on May 3. While the country may still be in the ICU, its immediate liquidity crisis has been sorted, and default has been avoided. This has given some confidence to the markets, he said. Record highs of PSX Commenting on the frequent new highs of the Pakistan Stock Exchange (PSX), Mr Ye observed that previously, when the eurobond payment was due, there had been a lot of hype in the media with speculations about whether the country would be able to repay or default. Such pieces did not induce courage and the markets started fluctuating, contributing to a fluctuating exchange rate. Banks top official says Pakistan has sorted out immediate liquidity crisis, but still in ICU This time around, in April, when the $1bn eurobond payment was due, it was paid without fanfare, indicating much better market confidence. Other positive indicators, such as a narrowing external account deficit and recovering remittances, have also improved investor confidence. However, fiscal deficit challenges remain. One major reason behind them is the high interest rate and high debt servicing burden. Act on what you know In my first meeting with Finance Minister Muhammad Aurangzeb, he showed his commitment to implementing and acting on reforms, said Mr Ye. Pakistan does not need more economic prescriptions, he said, agreeing with the finance ministers recent statements. He said the general perception is that Pakistan knows what it needs to do but never does it. Act on what you know needs to be done. He emphasised that the ADB management wants to be with the government in this difficult time. The agency understands the need to ensure that the debt is sustainable rather than an added burden that does not remove the constraints the country is facing. While the economy is recovering, there is still uncertainty moving forward. The removal of this uncertainty depends very much on the governments commitment and ability to implement economic and structural reforms. A special arrangement Mr Ye emphasised the importance of investment in reviving the economy and the role the Special Investment Facilitation Council (SIFC) could play. My understanding of SIFC is that it is a special arrangement to attract foreign direct investment from some targeted countries, he said. From the ADBs point of view, while the SIFC may be a quick short-term solution, Pakistan still needs to look for long-term systematic solutions to attract foreign direct investment. This would require an overall enabling environment with improved regulations and transparency. Given past unsuccessful incidents such as Reko Diq, SIFC, at least in the short run, can demonstrate the countrys potential and ability for investment, which can then be further broadened for other countries. An important element in attracting FDI is the ability of firms to repatriate profit out of the country. At the moment, investors may believe that while earning money in Pakistan is possible, repatriating profits is challenging. Non-productivity of real estate The country needs to increase its revenue and rationalise expenditures, Mr Ye remarked. As an example, he highlights the real estate sector where a lot of savings are invested. The real estate sector is just financial addition with no value addition. If the country invests in its natural resources instead, the country will start rolling, he said. Inflation is on a downward trend, and if this trend continues, the monetary policy rate will come down, Mr Ye opinioned, resulting in a smaller burden of debt servicing and more fiscal room. This will also unlock the investment and borrowing by the private sector, he hoped. Since there is a lot of pent-up investment demand during the period of high interest rates, Pakistan may enter into a boom cycle when the rates start coming down. But for the revival to be sustainable, it all comes back to reforms, he said.  Remaining pledges While ADB was among the institutions that pledged support after the disastrous floods of 2022, almost the entire amount has yet to be disbursed. ADB had pledged about $1.5bn, of which only $108.79 million has been released according to a media report, with a further $340.9m expected this year. In response to why there has been a delay, Mr Ye said that the amount pledged was for reconstruction and that the process cannot be rushed. The damages have to be assessed along with the ground realities, keeping in mind the new climate risk profile and the possibility that these areas may be flooded again, he said. Pointing out that water was still standing in some areas till the start of this year, Mr Ye said that the new climate risk profile needs to be assessed before the feasibility study. Some roads need to be redesigned, followed by the procurement process, contract award, and finally, disbursement. The entire process is lengthy. Mr Ye identified several critical areas for Pakistans long-term economic growth. These include controlling inflation, reducing the fiscal deficit, and diversifying the export base. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Govt hints at raising wheat purchase target
Description :  Drive to buy 400,000 tonnes of grain kicks off; farmers want wheat procured from across Punjab
 Kissan leader urges govt to ensure official rate of staple, terms proposed subsidy a pittance LAHORE: The Pakistan Agricultural Storage and Services Corporation Limited (Passco) on Saturday began its second phase of wheat procurement from Faisalabad in line with a decision of the federal government to procure 400,000 tonnes more than the original target of 1.4 million tonnes. As he kick-started the second phase, Food Minister Rana Tanveer hinted at the possibility of further increasing the target to facilitate farmers. Passco had originally aimed to purchase 1.4m tonnes, but after farmers started protesting, the pressure on the federal and provincial governments piled on and the premier decided to increase the target to 1.8m tonnes. As of now, Passco has achieved 98 per cent of the initial target and distribution of gunny bags is already underway to meet the increased target. Farmers, however, are not happy with the governments decision to procure slightly more wheat than intended. They said Passco  a federal body  operated in 13 out of 97 tehsils in Punjab and the decision to purchase additional wheat from designated areas would have a negligible impact. According to farmers, the tradeable surplus this year is expected to be about 10m tonnes and buying 400,000 tonnes would hardly make any difference. Punjab, on the other hand, is reluctant to procure wheat from growers despite province-wide agitations and the persistent stance of farmers. This has also caused a significant impact on the price of wheat, with the staple being sold at a rate much lower than the official price of Rs3,900 per 40kg. The Pakistan Kissan Ittehad claimed that farmers had lost Rs1,150 billion under the wheat head alone due to the crashing prices which reportedly dipped below Rs3,000 per 40kg. Instead of procurement, the Punjab government said it would compensate farmers with interest-free loans of Rs150bn. Kissan leader Khalid Mahmood Khokar, however, is not impressed, saying the paltry subsidy came at a cost of Rs1,150bn. Instead of this gimmickry, please ensure an officially declared price, which the provincial government had itself calculated, announced, and promised, Mr Khalid urged the Punjab government. The crisis Pakistan is going through the most difficult wheat season of its history, exacerbated by policy failure and the import of millions of tonnes of wheat shortly before the bumper harvest. The bumper crop followed a record import of 3.5m tonnes by the private sector allegedly due to the weakness of the caretaker regime.
Against the backdrop of such a huge import, hoarders also released their stock to earn profit. The releases of stock by the hoarders and the import of the commodity flooded the market and even met the entire domestic requirement, leaving Passco and the Punjab Food Department with 4m tonnes of unexhausted stock. The 3.5m tonnes imports were staggered in a way, in the name of sustained supplies, that it overlapped with domestic harvesting season and created havoc for the domestic market, explained Muhammad Ramzan, a wheat trader from Lahore. At the start of this month, the Punjab government had promised a probe into the wheat scandal against the backdrop of protests by the farmers. On Friday, the farmers resumed their protests from Multan against the provincial governments decision to not buy wheat from farmers. At the protest, PKI leader Khokhar had said the agitation would continue against the government in every district of the province till the acceptance of their demands. He had said the federal government was procuring the wheat in 16 tehsils of the province, while the Punjab government had not purchased even a single grain so far. Federal government should also buy wheat from other tehsils of the province, he had demanded. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Footprints: the day the city of Karachi went berserk
Description : This article was originally published on May 12, 2017 KARACHI: Attempt after attempt fails to elicit comments from direct witnesses to the carnage that took place in Karachi on May 12 ten years ago. All these men served as judges in the countrys high courts and the apex court before they retired to re-join the legal fraternity as seasoned practitioners of the law. For each of my requests, I receive either excuse me, or sorry. Finally, one of them agrees to talk  but not openly.  Please dont mention my name, says the retired Sindh High Court judge as our conversation ends. You may write each and every word I have shared with you but not my name. I would prefer to be an anonymous source. One never knows here what can happen the next day: its better to stay away from even the memories of such controversial events. The ordeal he recalls of that bloody Saturday refreshes the grim memories of the city being under siege for nearly 24 hours, held hostage by forces in the face of whom even jurists and law-enforcers were helpless.  Two rival rallies had been planned that day  one by the legal fraternity, backed by parties then in the opposition, to welcome into the city the then deposed chief justice, Iftikhar Mohammed Chaudhry, and the other organised by the Muttahida Qaumi Movement (MQM), favoured by the then military dictator General Pervez Musharraf, in protest against the politicisation of the issue of the presidential reference against Mr Chaudhry. A certain level of fear had prevailed, but no one could have guessed the deeply disturbing events that were to follow  certainly not the then serving high court judge. I was travelling with my driver and armed guard to the Sindh High Court where the chief justice had to deliver an address when we were forced to stop near Sir Syed Girls College in Nazimabad, he says.  Armed motorcyclists surrounded his official, flag-bearing car, pulled out his driver and switched off its engine, seizing the keys. The bikers then bludgeoned the stationary car several times, so hard that its bumper fell off. In one of the busiest and most densely populated city neighbourhoods, a serving judge sat in fear.  I talked to them, he says. They were obviously aware that I was a high court judge. After debate and argument, they allowed me to leave but I reminded them that I couldnt because keys of my car had been snatched by one of them. Finally, the key was returned and the judge was allowed to leave. As he got back into his car, the men surrounding him came up with their last strike: they stripped his car of the national flag. At the nearest police station of Pak Colony, he waited for nearly two hours for police security to arrive, as promised by the Governors House after it was informed about the episode. Then came an SSP-ranking officer with his team to escort me, he says. The police left us some two kilometres from the Singh High Court building, saying that they could no longer help us. My driver parked the car at a safer place. Then, with my driver and guard, I walked to the high court to find all entrances blocked. Finally, I jumped over one of the walls to enter the building. If this was the experience of a high court judge, one can only imagine the situation for political workers. In anticipation of the two rallies, law enforcers had been put on high alert the day before. The fire brigade had been directed to remain on standby and hospitals were asked to ready themselves. But the next day, hapless citizens found that the city had been abandoned by the law-enforcement agencies, and armed youths were wandering at will. Nasir Khan, one of the Awami National Party workers, witnessed a few of them at Malir Halt. I meet Nasir almost at the same spot where he narrowly escaped death. As our rally from Quaidabad reached here [Malir Halt], it came under fire, he says. I miraculously remained unhurt but I watched two of my friends die from bullet wounds and several others fell injured. It was a terrible experience and even today I shiver while recalling that day. After 10 years, only eyewitness accounts of the May 12 events remain. Justice and any action on the part of the state are still awaited. Should we call ourselves humanity when the fallen remain un-avenged a year to a day since that fateful day in May? wrote Justice Qazi Faez Isa, a Supreme Court judge and former chief justice of the Balochistan High Court, in this paper in 2008. Years later, the question remains pertinent. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2017  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Mothers Day: Reflections of a mother
Description : This piece was originally published in Dawn, Young World on May 9, 2020. Spending sleepless nights while tending to children, feeding them, changing diapers, etc. are a part of life of every mother having infants. When the infants grow up a little, the next phase is to educate them, teach them manners and make them learn to be a part of the world out there. It is tough to do all that for me, like every other mother. After all it is not all I have to do. One has to focus on ones career and household chores at the same time, and fulfil ones duties towards other family members. Did I mention a me-time somewhere in all that I said? I guess not. There is no mentioning of it simply because there is no time left for me while doing all that I do. It is said that you learn about the true value of parents once you have children of your own. I have found this to be exactly true. The sacrifices and unconditional love it takes to be a mother has certainly made me realise the sacrifices my mother made in bringing me up. Looking back at my life, I wish I could change all those moments in my life when, as a child, I misbehaved with my mother. I also wish that I had spent more time with her and made life easier for her. As my children grow up, they seem to become less obedient and respectful. This really hurts. I see this as a general trend in all the children, nowadays. With some exceptions, the older they get, the less respect they show to their mother and elders in general. Having a mind of ones own is fine, but there cannot be any excuse for bad behaviour towards ones mother. And also just because your mother is less strict and more friendly than your father, it should not lead you to not show respect to her. Mothers like me do not want our children to be our puppets. All we ask for is recognition of our love and efforts. Expecting respectfulness is a part of that recognition. Every mother would love her child to come up to her and, as a minimum, thank her for her efforts. It would be great if the child could offer to help her in little ways. If nothing else, they should at least not leave any mess for the mother to clean up! Mothers Day is important, but it is more than just a special day. It is really a reminder that mothers deserve our respect and recognition for their love at all times. For a child to have this realisation certainly means more to mothers than having a card or flowers on Mothers Day. This is because it means that this realisation would translate into care and respect for ones mother. For my part, I have started taking care of my mother in all the ways I can. While I do not live with her, I try my best to stay in touch or visit her as much as I can. Taking care of her health and what she wants has become very important for me. It does not matter to me what others do or say about taking care of their mothers. All that matters is what my mother deserves. And that exactly is my message to you all! Do not look at what others do, think of what you can do for your mother, who deserves all the love and respect that one can. Mothers can be your friends too if you learn to share things with her. It is just a misunderstanding that they would not understand you or what you want. You can talk about anything with her: sports, cartoons, TV shows, super heroes, general knowledge, etc. You would be pleasantly surprised when you do end up confiding in her or discussing things with her. I am lucky that I get cards and flowers from my family on Mothers Day. But many things remain left to be desired on the other 364 days of the year. Still whatever my children do the rest of the year, I would never stop caring for and loving them. I guess thats what the motherhood is all about. Happy Mothers Day everyone, but make every day Mothers Day, for she never fails to make everyday special for her children. Published in Dawn, Young World, May 9th, 2020 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Indian elections
Description : THE Islamophobic rhetoric being employed by Narendra Modi for this election campaign has become shrill. Pakistan has nearly always been an electoral issue in India. However, this time, it is Indian Muslims who are bearing the brunt of the Indian prime ministers hate speech. Speaking in Rajasthan last month, he called Muslims infiltrators and said they produce too many children. In Gujarat, where, as chief minister, he had overseen the massacre of Muslims in 2002, he accused the Congress of seeking to loot Indias wealth and redistribute it among Muslims, and of organising a vote jihad against his leadership. Later, he accused the Congress and Muslims of stealing Hindu wealth and property.
Modis inflammatory rhetoric was followed by the BJPs campaign video portraying Muslims as outsiders who plundered Indias wealth. As concerns grew about communal violence, the video was removed. These allegations are a sequel to Modis public referencing of earlier conspiracy theories of love jihad (Muslims forcibly converting Hindu women and marrying them to increase the Muslim population) or land jihad (capturing land to construct religious structures and gaining control of Indias territory). Concerns that his rhetoric might incite further violence against Indian Muslims are increasing. Ordinarily, since Hindus are in a majority in India, it may be difficult to question the rationale of creating a Hindu state. However, two observations are in order. One, the expansionist designs of the cherished Hindu state seek the creation of an Akhand Bharat, a Hindu right fantasy, which would violate the territorial integrity of Nepal, Bangladesh, Pakistan, and Afghanistan, as per a map displayed in the new parliament building. This is not acceptable to the aforementioned independent states. Two, though the creation of a Hindu state should not translate into discrimination against minorities, regrettably this will be the case. The works of French political scientist Christophe Jaffrelot illustrate how Muslims, 14.5 per cent of Indias population, are grossly underrepresented in bureaucracy, the judiciary, police, and legislative organs. They are second-class citizens.
The Muslim-majority area of Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmiri is also being subjected to demographic engineering. The destruction of the centuries-old Babri Masjid by Hindu zealots in 1992 and the construction of a temple in its place has set a precedent that might be followed for other historic mosques. This contrasts sharply with the UAEs gesture of permitting a Hindu temple in Abu Dhabi. Modis anti-Muslim rhetoric is raising concerns of violence. Analysts are also pointing out the fascist tendencies of the BJP regime, a steep decline in democratic values, and a departure from the moorings of pluralism and secularism on which modern India was founded. In her book The Incarcerations, Alpa Shah contends that Modis India is using its national security apparatus to incarcerate ordinary citizens for their dissenting views. Commenting on the book, Arundhati Roy stated that this was about criminalisation and incarceration of dissent itself. Strikingly, the Modi regime has also used art and culture to project the Hindutva philosophy. Kunal Purohits book H-Pop: The Secretive World of Hindutva Pop Stars shows how Hindutva pop stars and influencers are being used to spread the message of Hindu supremacy and create acceptance of Hindutvas core beliefs. Apart from this, Modi is playing on his governments accomplishments: making India the worlds fifth largest economy; the construction of 50,000 kilometres of national highways; boosting Indias military spending; building Vikrant, Indias first domestically built aircraft carrier; and the Chandrayaan-3 moon landing. His prospects of winning a third term have been bolstered by a weak opposition. Despite the formation of the Congress-led 37-party INDIA coalition, there is no real challenge. What has bolstered his outreach is Indias enhanced global standing. In his book Why Bharat Matters, S. Jaishankar presents India as a leader of the global south and makes a case for the rejuvenation of India as a civilisational state.
There are some lessons that Pakistan could learn from Indias electoral process. One, despite the large scale of Indias elections (969 million registered voters; 1m polling stations) and the use of electronic voting machines, election results are largely accepted without much ado. Two, there is no caretaker government, as the incumbents become caretakers in a way, and refrain from announcing major policy decisions or sanctioning expenditure for development schemes. If Modi wins a third term, he is likely to maintain his pro-Hindutva, anti-Muslim, and hegemonic attitude towards regional countries, particularly Pakistan. The write is a former foreign secretary and chairman of Sanober Institute Islamabad. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Who can rock the hybrid boat?
Description : A NUMBER of developments over the past week suggest that the establishment is keen to enforce/ maintain the status quo and the only impediment in its path may be an assertive superior judiciary that has been increasingly finding its feet in recent weeks. If jailed PTI leader and former prime minister Imran Khans article in UKs conservative right-wing Telegraph newspaper blaming the military leadership directly for all his woes the week before was not hint enough of the state of play, two public statements by the latter clarified issues rather unambiguously. The first came in the DG ISPRs press briefing, which was ostensibly called to discuss Afghanistan-based terrorist groups involvement in attacks on Chinese nationals working on development projects in the country. But in response to a couple of questions about the PTI and Imran Khan related to the events of May 9 last year, the DG ISPR stated unequivocally that the only path to rehabilitation for the political party and its leaders was to seek forgiveness for attacking your own forces.
Then, perhaps, talks could happen and that too with political parties (ie, the government), as the military had nothing to do with politics. Imran Khan has been consistent in saying he wouldnt talk to the powerless political parties and that a meaningful dialogue is possible only with the military. The DG ISPR also lamented the delay in the prosecution and sentencing of all those responsible for the May mayhem  including the leaders and mastermind against whom irrefutable evidence has been gathered and submitted  and, in doing so, appeared to hint at the establishments frustrations with what it perceives as roadblocks being erected by the judiciary. The content of the live presser evoked an equally adamant response from the PTI, which went on the offensive, reiterating its stance that May 9 was a false flag operation, accusing the militarys spokesman of being economical with the truth, and saying it would be happy to live with the findings of an impartial judicial commission into the May 9 events and would even apologise if found to be at fault. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. The military spokesman had pre-empted this demand in his briefing earlier by saying if a probe were to happen, as was being demanded, it ought to start with 2014, and not nine years later. The 2014 PTI sit-in in the federal capital was said to have been instigated and backed by the then ISI chief. This was the first indication that the military was prepared to hold its own accountable for past follies, if it paved the way for the trials and sentencing of PTI leaders it says were responsible for the attacks on defence installations in a number of cities in Punjab and KP. While the spokesman left nothing to the imagination, on the first anniversary of May 9, the army chief added his voice to his chief spokesmans in terms of stressing the need for punishing the perpetrators of the violence a year earlier, also lashing out against what he called digital terrorism.
This indicates that harsher curbs on social media are planned. So far, the PTI has had overwhelming social media dominance and had been able to keep a step ahead of its adversaries, but we will find out soon whether it has what it takes to bypass software the Chinese have developed over the years (and Pakistan has reportedly acquired) and successfully used to block dissident content. With this ever-widening gulf between the establishment and the party it once saw as a panacea for all that ails Pakistan, the one thing that many felt could force a rethink in the establishment would have been a public manifestation of the immense support enjoyed by the PTI, as evidenced in last Februarys elections. Many Pakistan watchers keenly waited all day for multitudes of PTI supporters to spill out onto the roads and streets of major urban conurbations on the party leaders call to break the shackles and protest on May 9. But the brutal crackdown of the past one year seems to have knocked the wind out of the partys sails and worn down the workers will. People may turn out to vote for it in droves, but did not appear prepared to risk life, limb and liberty in coming out for mass protests. Some small localised protests did happen, but had zero impact in the sense of influencing decision-making in the corridors of power. Going forward, a couple of factors will play a role in steering developments. The first and foremost will be the confidence the army chief has in his control over his institution. His predecessor appointed a dozen major generals to three stars in his final six weeks in office and left the incumbent little room in terms of forming his own team. Natural attrition and the more dramatic exit of a couple of three stars on disciplinary grounds recently has, 18 months down the line, given the chief an opportunity to place senior officers of his own choosing in key roles which will give him greater freedom of action both inside and outside the institution. The promotion of three officers this week, including the DG ISPR, to three stars was another step in that direction. The military saw May 9 as a coup against the chief, a failed attempt to dislodge him from office. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. With the PTI protests failing to gather momentum, the only impediment in his path seems to be an increasingly assertive superior judiciary. It can and will, in all likelihood, challenge the establishments pre-eminence in decision-making. It isnt clear how the latter plans to deal with that, especially because it believes that a direly needed economic revival is only possible under the umbrella of a hybrid set-up and in a relatively calm political environment. Only the judiciary can rock its boat now. The writer is a former editor of Dawn. abbas.nasir@hotmail.com Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Looming pension crisis cries out for corrective measures
Description : Pension reform is again a hot topic, but this time, bureaucrats will make it appear as if it is intended to benefit top officials. The reforms go beyond just raising the retirement age or taxing pensions. Instead, a series of actions, similar to those that were done in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP), should be seriously considered to reduce the cost of pensions to the government exchequer. The national pension cost will reach nearly Rs2 trillion in FY24, and it is predicted to rise to Rs10tr in the next decade if no reforms are implemented. In 2002-03, the pension cost stood at Rs25 billion, but in a span of just 20 years, it skyrocketed to over Rs1.5tr. Pension reforms have previously been tested in KP and generated the expected cost-saving results. It is high time to rationalise the existing pension programme and transition to more modern schemes available in developing and developed countries. Last week, Finance Minister Muhammad Aurangzeb proposed to raise the retirement age from 60 to 65 years. It has sparked controversy over whether the government intends to benefit only a select few individuals. This decision has both advantages and disadvantages. In KP, the age restriction was raised to 63 years in 2019 with a projected annual savings of Rs20bn. However, the decision was reversed due to strong protest from bureaucrats, and the court also overturned the decision. However, KPs other pension reforms remained in effect. KP Advisor on Finance Muzzammil Aslam has a different take on raising the age restriction than his predecessor, who implemented a series of reforms. Mr Aslam believes that the lump sum payment of pension payments will be delayed for the next five years, providing some breathing room for the time being. This will allow the government to show a lower budget deficit. The net impact will increase when the five-year allowances are added to the basic salary, which will be used to pay the pension. The age extension will postpone payments, but total payouts to employees will climb over the following five years. While these efforts provide some relief in the short term, crucial steps must be implemented to address the increasing pension liabilities. The governments liabilities have jumped from Rs25bn in FY03 to Rs2tr in FY24 There is another idea to tax pensions. It may also face political challenges. However, the KP government has imposed a 5pc pension tax on grades 17 and above on their executive allowance. It is estimated that this measure alone will generate Rs150bn in contributions to a pay-as-you-go pension system. This was not an easy decision, but it was made in KP to obtain some contribution from existing employees. The federal government can look into this step in response to opposition to taxing pensions. KP reforms In 2004, based on recommendations from a World Bank project, the India implemented a national pension scheme wherein employee contributions are matched by the government. Pakistan did not choose to adopt it since it was not anticipated that the cost would rise so dramatically over the next 20 years. Taimur Khan Jhagra, former finance minister of KP, took the lead in implementing a series of pension reforms, including the introduction of a contributory pension scheme for new employees beginning July 1, 2022. Few substantial changes were made to the existing pension programme. A well-known 13-tier pension system was in place, covering the pensioners widow, children, parents, siblings, sisters, and grandchildren. KP confined it to direct dependents. The federal government did the same last year, but other provinces have not followed suit. The previous PTI government raised KP and Punjabs minimum retirement age to 55 from 45, reducing KPs pension bill by Rs20bn alone. KP consolidated various pensions into a single one. Previously, individuals could receive two pensions simultaneously, with an active employee receiving both a salary and a pension. The major reform is the implementation of a contributing pension scheme for new employees. Under this programme, the KP government contributes 12pc and employees contribute 10pc. So far, 40,000 staff have been hired under this system starting July 1, 2022. There are additional critical reforms that the KP and federal governments should implement, such as revisiting the single Universal Pay Scale between Grades 1 and 22. Pay in provinces is decoupled from the Centre and between departments, allowing each department to develop a pay scale appropriate for their budget and the market value of their professions. Pension reforms are greatly needed. The question is whether the state will be able to sustain pension payments for the next 10 to 15 years. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : SMOKERS CORNER: KHAN AND THE GENERALS
Description : In May 2023, a recorded phone call  allegedly between the mother-in-law of the former Chief Justice of Pakistan (CJP) Umar Atta Bandial, and the wife of a lawyer-member of Imran Khans populist Pakistan Tehreek-i-Insaf (PTI)  was leaked on social media. In the call, the two ladies can be heard criticising the coalition government made up of the parties that had ousted Khans regime in April 2022 through an act of parliament. At one point in the leaked conversation, the mother-in-law laments, Yeh kambakht martial law bhi tau nahin lagaatay! [These cursed people dont even impose martial law!] Bykambakht,she meant the military establishment (ME). The conversation was surreal on many levels. Khan had been the blue-eyed boy of the ME, until he had a falling out with his makers. From 2011 till he was elected as prime minister in 2018, the ME had successfully shaped Khans political rise in a highly coordinated manner. His popularity was first established within the rank and file of the military. Then, some TV journalists were brought on board, followed by the induction of some vital members of the judiciary.
This troika  the ME, the electronic media and the judiciary  was complimented by the trained social media wing of Khans PTI to proliferate narratives pitched against the two older mainstream parties, the Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N) and the Pakistan Peoples Party (PPP). The two were deeply demonised as being corrupt. After his ouster, Imran Khan was convinced that the establishment had betrayed him, and the May 9-10 protests last year were an attempt to rally support amongst pro-Khan factions in the military. However, any military intervention was drastically overestimated by his supporters A constituency that had initially been built by the former military dictator Gen Pervez Musharraf, and which mostly consisted of middle-class and upper-middle-class Pakistanis, was navigated by the ME and the media in such a manner that it eventually fell in Khans lap. This became a quadrilateral elite, comprising the ME, the media, the judiciary and the middle classes. After Khans ouster in April 2022, he began to publicly lambast the ME, accusing it of betraying him. But the truth is, due to the many abject failures of Khans government, the ME had begun to gradually distance itself from him months before he was ousted. In February 2022, Bandial became the CJP. He was cut from the same cloth that at least four of his predecessors were. These included Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry and, even more so, Justice Saqib Nasir, Justice Asif Khosa and Justice Gulzar Ahmad. Anti-PTI parties often accused them of being overtly pro-Khan. Justice Bandial was accused of having a soft corner for Khan. Truth is, Bandial wasnt very good at hiding this soft corner. Now the question is, during the time of the aforementioned phone call leak, when Khan was holding angry rallies and condemning the ME, why was Bandials mother-in-law yearning for a military takeover? Equally surreal was the presence of banners in some pro-Khan rallies with We Want Martial Law written on them. Also, why did the PTI  by planning last years violent riots on May 9 and 10, in which PTI supporters and members attacked military property  believe that this would cause a split in the armed forces and bring pro-Khan generals to power? Many academics who study coups are of the view that, if the conditions allow, street protests can be followed by a coup detat. According to the political scientist Scott A Tyson, protests are often a signal to the elites to intervene.
The elites in this context are the military and political elites. These may also include the higher judiciary and business elites. A regime facing the protests, too, is made up of political elites. Once the anti-regime elites decide that the protests are clearly signalling for an intervention, this is then communicated to the state elites. The media too plays a role in this. Its reporting of the protests may strengthen the signal and galvanise the military to intervene. The mother-in-laws kambakht lament was expressing a desperate yearning within sections of economic elites for military intervention. This nature of signalling was loud and clear on numerous WhatsApp groups when Khan was holding rallies against his ouster. The signal became even more obvious when the We Want Martial Law banners began to appear at the rallies. Some media personnel also started enhancing the signal to the ME. But by late 2022, the MEs top leadership had changed. A general who had earlier exited the project that was set up to facilitate Khans rise became the new army chief. Yet, PTI believed that many remnants of the project were still active within the military. I believe that with the judiciary still in facilitation mode, the notion of causing a split within the military to replace the new military chief with pro-Khan generals was the brainwave of some retired military men who were well-versed in the theories of post-protest coups. Once the signal to intervene in Khans post-ouster rallies was ignored by the new ME, a violent uprising was conceived that was to target the new ME. The uprising was enacted to evoke the concerns of the supposed pro-Khan generals. The signal now was: eject the new army chief and intervene (on the side of Khan) to avoid an all-out civil war. This plan could not have been formulated without the input of some retired officers. Many of them had been quite vocal in their support for Khan.
The violent May 9 and 10 protests were orchestrated by a political elite (PTI) against another set of elites (the coalition government) to signal the need for an intervention to judicial and military elites. But, according to Tyson, whether or not a coup will succeed is generally not certain to elites. This uncertainty is caused by the uncertainty regarding the actions of other elites. The other elite, in the context of the May 9 and 10 riots, was the military. An intervention by pro-Khan officers was drastically overestimated by the planners and the plan collapsed. The coalition government was able to withstand the assault. The new military chief began to swiftly oust the remaining pro-Khan elements from the military  even though those remaining in the judiciary are now trying to avoid suffering a similar fate through a pushback in the name of the independence of the judiciary.This, too, is quite surreal. Published in Dawn, EOS, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : A turbulent 2023
Description : PAKISTAN faced a tumultuous year in 2023 marked by severe economic distress and a sharp erosion of civil liberties. As documented in the HRCPs annual report, the year was nothing short of a human rights crisis on multiple fronts. Economic hardship was pervasive, with back-breaking inflation  nearly 40pc  and low growth hitting the common citizen the hardest. Protests were widespread, ranging from government employees striking against delayed salaries and pension issues to political demonstrations demanding timely elections. The state responded with indifference and sometimes outright violence, underlining its disregard for the peoples constitutional rights. The political arena was no less strained: the year saw unprecedented violence following the arrest of former prime minister Imran Khan; subsequent PTI-led riots were met with harsh government crackdowns. This included mass arrests and the controversial use of military courts for civilian trials. Political dissent was stifled and freedom of speech curtailed with internet shutdowns and media gags on reporting of certain political leaders. Sadly, the governments management of the turmoil involved significant overreach, impacting judicial independence and skewing the electoral landscape. The swift passage of laws granting sweeping powers to intelligence agencies and restricting media freedoms points to the governments alarming propensity to consolidate power at the cost of transparency and accountability.
Human rights violations were not limited to political suppression. The report highlights severe abuses such as enforced disappearances, alleged extrajudicial killings and custodial torture by state agencies. The societal impact of these policies and actions has been devastating. Moreover, marginalised communities, including women, children, religious minorities, and transgender persons, faced increased violence and discrimination. Notable too was the harsh crackdown on peaceful assemblies like the Baloch Yakjehti Councils protests. On the international front, despite engaging with global human rights mechanisms, Pakistans selective adherence to recommendations concerning enforced disappearances and the use of the death penalty reflected a reluctance to fully align with international human rights standards. Rulers would do well to remember that adhering to those standards will help maintain Pakistans desperately needed GSP-Plus status and be a more inviting place for foreign investment.
As the year proceeds, it is imperative for the state to reconsider its approach to human rights. The government must ensure the independence of the judiciary, respect for democratic processes, and protection for all citizens against the abuse of power. Laws that infringe on freedom of expression and assembly should be reviewed and reformed. Additionally, there should be a concerted effort to address the economic inequalities that underpin much of the social unrest. For a stable and prosperous Pakistan, human rights must be more than an ideal; they must be an integral part of governance and everyday life. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Love knows no boundaries at Karachis Edhi Home nursery for special children
Description : KARACHI: Its one day to Mothers Day and the childrens nursery at the Edhi Home in Mithadar is decorated with balloons and posters along with framed photographs of the late couple Abdul Sattar Edhi and Bilquis Edhi. Children in the classrooms are busy making greeting cards, drawing pictures of themselves and the only woman whom they have come to know as their mother, their Chhoti (younger) Mummy Sabah Faisal Edhi. The duties of the busy mother of so many children, including four of her own, starts from early morning. After tending to her own household duties and sending off her youngest, Moosa Edhi, to school, she is in the nursery at 8am sharp, inquiring from the staff there if everyone had a good sleep, if anyone had any issues during the night. It has become a habit with her to visit the nursery first to inquire about her babies before getting to her other work of calling up the other Edhi Homes and Centres, asking about the other children, their health and school progress, asking about the women in their Homes, tending to the marriage proposals, and adoption procedures and planning outings and picnics for the children. When parents discover their babies are not well, they quietly leave them in our cot, says Sabah Edhi as country celebrates Mothers Day today But today, before she can go inside the nursery, she stops in the playroom to admire three-year-old Fatimas greeting her with a broad smile and a happy dance. Chhoti Mummy hugs the child and gestures to know if she has eaten breakfast. Fatima is deaf and mute. She has only recently been fitted with a cochlear implant, which has enabled her to hear and appreciate music to which she loves to dance. It is quite obvious that Sabahs favourite in the nursery is five-year-old Moosa, named by Mummy, Bilquis Edhi, herself, after her own youngest grandson, Sabah and Faisals youngest son Moosa. But this Moosa, even though he is five, doesnt look more than a year old. His growth is stunted. Sabah lifts him out of his cot and cuddles him lovingly. The nursery only has special children or children with learning disabilities. Moosa was the last child here named by Bilquis Edhi. The rest have been given names by their Chhoti Mummy. There are two newborn baby girls, Aimen and Noor Fatima, peacefully sleeping in their cradles in the cheerful blue nursery. Both the babies are blind. The moment some parents discover that all is not well with their babies they quietly leave them in our cot, says Sabah. They never return for them, she sighs. Parents of very sick children, too, disown them even when they know that their child doesnt have much time to live. We take them in, find them the best of medical care till the last of their breath, she adds. On discovering a child in the cot, we first try to get information about who left him or her there followed by a thorough medical check-up. If they are in need of medical care, we make sure that they receive the best that there is. Just the other day, someone left a little girl suffering from diarrhoea. She had to be hospitalised, she informs. Just then one little girl, of about four years of age, who also looks like she is considerably attached to her Chhoti Mummy walks in and runs up to her. She is normal. There is nothing wrong with this one, Sabah says. She says her name is Manahil. We found her near Sohrab Goth. Most of the children in our Sohrab Goth Centre are much older so I brought her here with me until we can find her parents, she informs. By the grace of God, there is no shortage of space, love and care in this Home built for these children by Edhi Sahab and Mummy, she says, kissing the childs head. All children are a blessing, a priceless gift from God. I wish the parents who discard their children like or neglect them would realise this. I wish such parents could love their special, disabled or sick children like they love their normal children, she says. Sometimes, these very children who they love so much because they are normal and healthy grow up to discard their parents when they are old and weak. Thats the story of so many old people in our homes, she concludes. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Ruling coalition loses 27 reserved seats in Punjab
Description :  Speaker suspends PML-Ns 23, PPPs two, and one member each of PML-Q, IPP
 Decision announced on point of order raised by PTI-backed SIC leader
 In National Assembly, ruling coalition also likely to lose 23 seats ahead of budget session LAHORE / ISLAMABAD: The ruling coalition in Punjab led by PML-N on Friday lost dozens of reserved seats in the provincial assembly when the speaker suspended 24 women and three minority MPAs elected on reserved seats and barred them from joining the house proceedings. Twenty-three of the suspended MPAs belonged to PML-N, two to PPP and one each to PML-Q and IPP. Speaker Malik Mohammad Ahmed Khan took the decision on a point of order raised a day ago by opposition lawmaker Rana Aftab of PTI-backed Sunni Ittehad Council (SIC) during the house proceedings. The opposition member had argued that the Supreme Court had suspended the decision of the Election Commission of Pakistan (ECP) of allocating the reserved seats of SIC to other parties on the plea that the SIC had neither contested elections nor had submitted a list of nominees for the seats reserved for women and minorities. But Speaker Khan ruled that he had sought opinions of the advocate general as well as the provincial law department and would take a decision only on receiving their reports. Soon after the beginning of house proceedings on Friday, the speaker read out the Supreme Court order and gave the ruling that Rana Aftabs point of order was lawful and suspended the 27 members immediately. When Mr Aftab pointed out that the suspended MPAs had unlawfully voted for the resolution condemning May 9 violence, the chair said he should have raised the issue when the resolution had been put to vote a day ago. The women MPAs suspended were Maqsoodan Bibi, Rubina Nazir, Salma Zahid, Kanwal Nauman, Zeba Ghafoor, Saeeda Samreen Taj, Sheharbano, Amna Parveen, Syed Sumera Ahmed, Uzma Butt, Afshan Hussain, Shagufta Faisal, Nasreen Riaz, Sajida Naveed, Farzana Abbas, Mariya Talal, Tasheen Fawad, Abida Bashir, Saeeda Muzaffar, Faiza Monima, Amera Khan, Samiya Ata, Rahat Afza and Rukhsana Shafiq. The minority MPAs were Tariq Masih Gill, Waseem Anjum, and Basroji. National Assembly After the Supreme Courts decision and the Punjab Assembly speakers action, the ruling coalition in the National Assembly is also set to lose nearly two dozen members ahead of the crucial budget session. President Asif Ali Zardari on Friday summoned the National Assembly session on Monday (May 13) and the SIC members are expected to seek a similar ruling from Speaker Ayaz Sadiq. After allocating reserved seats to the parties in the NA in proportion to the general seats won by them in the Feb 8 elections, the Election Commission of Pakistan (ECP) had withheld the notifications on 23 reserved seats  20 for women and three for minorities  due to the dispute on the allocation of the seats after the decision of the PTI-backed independents to join the SIC. Later, the ECP refused to allocate these seats to the SIC and issued notifications distributing these seats to the parties in the ruling coalition headed by the PML-N. The ECP allocated 15 seats reserved for women to the PML-N, four to PPP and one to the JUI-F. It allocated one seat each reserved for the minorities to the PML-N, the PPP and the MQM-P. As a result, PML-N became the largest party in the NA with 123 seats whereas the tallies of PPP and the JUI-F rose to 73 and 11, respectively. The ECP had also issued notifications on the reserved seats for women and minorities in Punjab and the KP assemblies the same day. The PML-N had initially won a total of 75 general seats and was joined by nine independents. With the allocation of 19 reserved seats for women and four reserved seats for minorities, the number reached 107. However, after the March 5 notifications, the PML-N had been allocated 15 out of the remaining 20 reserved seats for women and one out of the three remaining seats reserved for minorities, taking the partys tally to 123 seats. Likewise, PPP had won 54 general seats and was allocated 12 seats reserved for women and two for minorities. After the allocation of four more seats reserved for women and one for minorities on March 5, the number of the PPP lawmakers is now 73, still fewer than the PTI-backed independents who had joined the SIC hoping to get reserved seats. The MQM-Pakistan has 22 members in the National Assembly, while the number of JUI-F lawmakers had gone up to 11 from seven. The SC decision is expected to have no effect in the composition of the Balochistan Assembly as PTI had not won any seat in the province in the Feb 8 polls. However, in the provincial assembly of Sindh, the two reserved seats for women were given to PPP from the share of the PTI-SIC, which had nine members. KP Assembly The most interesting distribution of reserved seats had been observed in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Assembly, where the PTI-backed independents had won 91 seats compared to just 19 seats secured by all other political parties combined. However, the JUI-F, which could get only seven general seats to stay on top among these political parties, was allocated 10 reserved seats for women. Likewise, the PML-N, which won six general seats, was given eight reserved seats. The PPP, which bagged four general seats, was allocated six reserved seats. The ANP and the PTI-P, which clinched one general seat each, also remained lucky to have their numbers double in the provincial assembly. However, these MPAs in KP Assembly have not yet taken oath as the speaker has refused to call the session. Gwadar killings Meanwhile, the Punjab Assembly during its Fridays sitting adopted a resolution condemning the recent killing of 11 workers belonging to Punjab in Gwadar. The resolution presented by treasury members Amjad Ali Javed demanded the federal government arrest the culprits. It also demanded that the centre announce a compensation package for the heirs of the deceased. South Punjab On a point of order raised by opposition MPA Nadeem Qureshi, Punjab Finance Minister Mujtaba Shuja told the house that the south Punjab secretariat was not being wrapped up; rather the officers who had been promoted were being replaced by new appointments. The minister also rejected the stance that the PML-N was against the development of south Punjab and said that the region had been developed the most when incumbent Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif was the chief minister of Punjab. Published in Dawn, May 11th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Downside risks for Pakistan remain exceptionally high: IMF
Description : Downside risks for the economy remain exceptionally high, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) said on Friday in its staff report ahead of the governments talks with the fund on a longer term progamme. An IMF mission is expected to visit the country this month to discuss a new programme, ahead of the government beginning its annual budget-making process for the next financial year. Downside risks remain exceptionally high. While the new government has indicated its intention to continue the SBAs (standby arrangement) policies, political uncertainty remains significant, said the fund in its staff report following the second and final review under the SBA.
The fund added that political complexities and high cost of living could weigh on policy, adding that policy slippages, together with lower external financing, could undermine the narrow path to debt sustainability and place pressure on the exchange rate. The IMF also said higher commodity prices and disruptions to shipping, or tighter global financial conditions, would also adversely affect external stability for the cash-strapped nation. The fund stressed the need for timely post-programme external financing disbursements.
Last month, the country completed a short-term $3 billion programme, which helped stave off sovereign default, but Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif has stressed the need for a fresh, longer term programme. Pakistan narrowly averted default last summer and the economy has stabilised after the completion of the last IMF programme with inflation coming down to around 17 per cent in April from a record high 38pc last May. The country is still dealing with a high fiscal shortfall and while the external account deficit has been controlled through import control mechanisms, it has come at the expense of stagnating growth, which is expected to be around 2pc this year compared to negative growth last year. Pakistan is expected to seek at least $6bn and request additional financing from the Fund under the Resilience and Sustainability Trust. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Pakistan remain unbeaten in Azlan Shah Cup as match with New Zealand ends in tie
Description : Pakistan on Friday secured a tie in their match against New Zealand in the 30th Azlan Shah Hockey Cup. Pakistans fifth match today, which was played in Malaysias Ipoh city at 1pm (PKT), saw them remain unbeaten throughout the tournament. The match ended in a draw, with both teams securing one point each, the Pakistan Hockey Federation (PHF) said.
View this post on Instagram
Senior player Ammad Shakeel is leading the 18-member squad with Abu Bakr as the vice-captain. Japan lead the points table with 13 points while Pakistan rank second with 11 points. New Zealand hold the third position with seven points while Malaysia follow them with a point less.
View this post on Instagram
According to the PHF, both Pakistan and New Zealand had not scored by half-time. New Zealand then succeeded in scoring a field goal in the 35th minute of the game. However, Abu Bakr amassed a goal for Pakistan in the 43rd minute while playing at the penalty corner. Pakistan and Japan had already qualified for the final match, which will take place at 5:30pm (PKT) on Saturday at the Azlan Shah Stadium in Ipoh, after winning their respective matches on Wednesday. Pakistan had defeated Canada 5-4 while Japan beat hosts Malaysia 2-1. According to Radio Pakistan, Pakistan have won their three matches against Malaysia, South Korea and Canada while the ones against Japan and New Zealand ended in a draw. Meanwhile, after their 3-1 victory against Canada today, Japan have four wins plus a draw. Earlier this month, head coach Roelant Oltmans had said he expected an improved show by Pakistan in the tournament. Oltmans, 69, has served Pakistans senior and junior teams in different roles since 2004 and was involved with the youth side in his most recent stint. Pakistan won the Azlan Shah Cup title thrice  in 1999, 2000 and 2003  and came third in the last edition which was also held in Ipoh in 2022. Malaysia are the defending champions of this years edition. Addressing the squad via video link, Information Minister Attaullah Tarar reiterated the governments commitment to hockey while also mentioning a campaign across all forms of media to highlight the teams achievements in the Azlan Shah Cup, according to a report from state-run Radio Pakistan. He added that the prime minister would focus on removing obstacles in the development of hockey in Pakistan. Tara said final would be broadcast nationwide tomorrow on Saturday and wished the team luck. The entire nation is praying for the victory of Pakistan and is looking forward to welcome a champion team. Rana Mashood Ahmed, chairman of the Prime Ministers Youth Programme, also congratulated the team for reaching the final after thirteen years. He added that Prime Minister Shehbaz Sharif would also host the team on its return and address issues impeding hockeys development in the country. Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Who can rock the hybrid boat?
Description : A NUMBER of developments over the past week suggest that the establishment is keen to enforce/ maintain the status quo and the only impediment in its path may be an assertive superior judiciary that has been increasingly finding its feet in recent weeks. If jailed PTI leader and former prime minister Imran Khans article in UKs conservative right-wing Telegraph newspaper blaming the military leadership directly for all his woes the week before was not hint enough of the state of play, two public statements by the latter clarified issues rather unambiguously. The first came in the DG ISPRs press briefing, which was ostensibly called to discuss Afghanistan-based terrorist groups involvement in attacks on Chinese nationals working on development projects in the country. But in response to a couple of questions about the PTI and Imran Khan related to the events of May 9 last year, the DG ISPR stated unequivocally that the only path to rehabilitation for the political party and its leaders was to seek forgiveness for attacking your own forces.
Then, perhaps, talks could happen and that too with political parties (ie, the government), as the military had nothing to do with politics. Imran Khan has been consistent in saying he wouldnt talk to the powerless political parties and that a meaningful dialogue is possible only with the military. The DG ISPR also lamented the delay in the prosecution and sentencing of all those responsible for the May mayhem  including the leaders and mastermind against whom irrefutable evidence has been gathered and submitted  and, in doing so, appeared to hint at the establishments frustrations with what it perceives as roadblocks being erected by the judiciary. The content of the live presser evoked an equally adamant response from the PTI, which went on the offensive, reiterating its stance that May 9 was a false flag operation, accusing the militarys spokesman of being economical with the truth, and saying it would be happy to live with the findings of an impartial judicial commission into the May 9 events and would even apologise if found to be at fault. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. The military spokesman had pre-empted this demand in his briefing earlier by saying if a probe were to happen, as was being demanded, it ought to start with 2014, and not nine years later. The 2014 PTI sit-in in the federal capital was said to have been instigated and backed by the then ISI chief. This was the first indication that the military was prepared to hold its own accountable for past follies, if it paved the way for the trials and sentencing of PTI leaders it says were responsible for the attacks on defence installations in a number of cities in Punjab and KP. While the spokesman left nothing to the imagination, on the first anniversary of May 9, the army chief added his voice to his chief spokesmans in terms of stressing the need for punishing the perpetrators of the violence a year earlier, also lashing out against what he called digital terrorism.
This indicates that harsher curbs on social media are planned. So far, the PTI has had overwhelming social media dominance and had been able to keep a step ahead of its adversaries, but we will find out soon whether it has what it takes to bypass software the Chinese have developed over the years (and Pakistan has reportedly acquired) and successfully used to block dissident content. With this ever-widening gulf between the establishment and the party it once saw as a panacea for all that ails Pakistan, the one thing that many felt could force a rethink in the establishment would have been a public manifestation of the immense support enjoyed by the PTI, as evidenced in last Februarys elections. Many Pakistan watchers keenly waited all day for multitudes of PTI supporters to spill out onto the roads and streets of major urban conurbations on the party leaders call to break the shackles and protest on May 9. But the brutal crackdown of the past one year seems to have knocked the wind out of the partys sails and worn down the workers will. People may turn out to vote for it in droves, but did not appear prepared to risk life, limb and liberty in coming out for mass protests. Some small localised protests did happen, but had zero impact in the sense of influencing decision-making in the corridors of power. Going forward, a couple of factors will play a role in steering developments. The first and foremost will be the confidence the army chief has in his control over his institution. His predecessor appointed a dozen major generals to three stars in his final six weeks in office and left the incumbent little room in terms of forming his own team. Natural attrition and the more dramatic exit of a couple of three stars on disciplinary grounds recently has, 18 months down the line, given the chief an opportunity to place senior officers of his own choosing in key roles which will give him greater freedom of action both inside and outside the institution. The promotion of three officers this week, including the DG ISPR, to three stars was another step in that direction. The military saw May 9 as a coup against the chief, a failed attempt to dislodge him from office. If the chief was able to weather that storm then, he appears far more secure now. With the PTI protests failing to gather momentum, the only impediment in his path seems to be an increasingly assertive superior judiciary. It can and will, in all likelihood, challenge the establishments pre-eminence in decision-making. It isnt clear how the latter plans to deal with that, especially because it believes that a direly needed economic revival is only possible under the umbrella of a hybrid set-up and in a relatively calm political environment. Only the judiciary can rock its boat now. The writer is a former editor of Dawn. abbas.nasir@hotmail.com Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Indian elections
Description : THE Islamophobic rhetoric being employed by Narendra Modi for this election campaign has become shrill. Pakistan has nearly always been an electoral issue in India. However, this time, it is Indian Muslims who are bearing the brunt of the Indian prime ministers hate speech. Speaking in Rajasthan last month, he called Muslims infiltrators and said they produce too many children. In Gujarat, where, as chief minister, he had overseen the massacre of Muslims in 2002, he accused the Congress of seeking to loot Indias wealth and redistribute it among Muslims, and of organising a vote jihad against his leadership. Later, he accused the Congress and Muslims of stealing Hindu wealth and property.
Modis inflammatory rhetoric was followed by the BJPs campaign video portraying Muslims as outsiders who plundered Indias wealth. As concerns grew about communal violence, the video was removed. These allegations are a sequel to Modis public referencing of earlier conspiracy theories of love jihad (Muslims forcibly converting Hindu women and marrying them to increase the Muslim population) or land jihad (capturing land to construct religious structures and gaining control of Indias territory). Concerns that his rhetoric might incite further violence against Indian Muslims are increasing. Ordinarily, since Hindus are in a majority in India, it may be difficult to question the rationale of creating a Hindu state. However, two observations are in order. One, the expansionist designs of the cherished Hindu state seek the creation of an Akhand Bharat, a Hindu right fantasy, which would violate the territorial integrity of Nepal, Bangladesh, Pakistan, and Afghanistan, as per a map displayed in the new parliament building. This is not acceptable to the aforementioned independent states. Two, though the creation of a Hindu state should not translate into discrimination against minorities, regrettably this will be the case. The works of French political scientist Christophe Jaffrelot illustrate how Muslims, 14.5 per cent of Indias population, are grossly underrepresented in bureaucracy, the judiciary, police, and legislative organs. They are second-class citizens.
The Muslim-majority area of Indian-occupied Jammu and Kashmiri is also being subjected to demographic engineering. The destruction of the centuries-old Babri Masjid by Hindu zealots in 1992 and the construction of a temple in its place has set a precedent that might be followed for other historic mosques. This contrasts sharply with the UAEs gesture of permitting a Hindu temple in Abu Dhabi. Modis anti-Muslim rhetoric is raising concerns of violence. Analysts are also pointing out the fascist tendencies of the BJP regime, a steep decline in democratic values, and a departure from the moorings of pluralism and secularism on which modern India was founded. In her book The Incarcerations, Alpa Shah contends that Modis India is using its national security apparatus to incarcerate ordinary citizens for their dissenting views. Commenting on the book, Arundhati Roy stated that this was about criminalisation and incarceration of dissent itself. Strikingly, the Modi regime has also used art and culture to project the Hindutva philosophy. Kunal Purohits book H-Pop: The Secretive World of Hindutva Pop Stars shows how Hindutva pop stars and influencers are being used to spread the message of Hindu supremacy and create acceptance of Hindutvas core beliefs. Apart from this, Modi is playing on his governments accomplishments: making India the worlds fifth largest economy; the construction of 50,000 kilometres of national highways; boosting Indias military spending; building Vikrant, Indias first domestically built aircraft carrier; and the Chandrayaan-3 moon landing. His prospects of winning a third term have been bolstered by a weak opposition. Despite the formation of the Congress-led 37-party INDIA coalition, there is no real challenge. What has bolstered his outreach is Indias enhanced global standing. In his book Why Bharat Matters, S. Jaishankar presents India as a leader of the global south and makes a case for the rejuvenation of India as a civilisational state.
There are some lessons that Pakistan could learn from Indias electoral process. One, despite the large scale of Indias elections (969 million registered voters; 1m polling stations) and the use of electronic voting machines, election results are largely accepted without much ado. Two, there is no caretaker government, as the incumbents become caretakers in a way, and refrain from announcing major policy decisions or sanctioning expenditure for development schemes. If Modi wins a third term, he is likely to maintain his pro-Hindutva, anti-Muslim, and hegemonic attitude towards regional countries, particularly Pakistan. The write is a former foreign secretary and chairman of Sanober Institute Islamabad. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Overflowing cups
Description : ON my travels in the last two years I noticed a new accessory: large water bottles. You know the ones with the straw protruding from its top? The most coveted one at the moment is the one which retails for around $45  which is roughly Rs12,000, but sells for Rs18,000 in some Karachi markets. This water bottle is a reminder of how our overconsumption is exacerbating the climate crisis. Despite all the evidence, it doesnt feel like a climate crisis when you look at our tendency to buy more  of everything. Plenty has been written about how bulk buying of clothes has accelerated fast fashion culture. These fast-moving trends have a devastating impact on the climate, from labour abuse in the garment industry to microfibres polluting Earth and water. The fashion industry is estimated to be responsible for 10 per cent of global carbon emissions, according to a 2020 report by the European Parliament. Although fashion houses will use terms like sustainable practices, only 1pc of used clothing is recycled into new clothes. The global textile production has doubled from 58 million tonnes in 2010 and is expected to grow to 145m tonnes by 2030, says the European Environment Agency. This is great news for world economies, except that it takes 200 years for some materials to decompose: synthetic fabrics like polyester, for example, break down into small plastic particles which last forever. This should horrify us, but one look at women lining up to buy the new XYZ designer lawn collection across Pakistan proves weve not grasped the severity of the climate crisis. Or care about it. I can sympathise with this, having heard people say how despondent they feel about the state of the  well, state; how change doesnt seem likely, so why care about the environment. My students, however, care very much about the environment, more than politicians do; they are inheriting a planet deluged in waste. But as valiant a generation this Z is proving  defying universitys bullying tactics for example  they are, according to studies, also the most likely to be influenced. Earlier, there was value attached to things and a sensibility too. Against this backdrop, whats the harm in buying a stainless steel cup which comes with a lifetime guarantee? Because it does not stop at one cup. You only have to go to TikTok to see the cupboards lined up with up to 37 different coloured cups of a single brand. People line up outside stores to buy the new release, there are sites dedicated to selling them. This particular company, which catered to blue collar workers in the US, has gone from earning $73m in 2019 to $750m last year, according to Vox. The companys claim, that it can keep cold drinks cold for 11 hours and hot drinks hot for seven hours, received an unlikely boost when, last year, a womans cup survived a car fire. The woman posted a Tik Tok (of course) of her burned-to-a-shell car, but the cup remained in its cup holder, and she rattled it to show the ice was still in it. This was marketing gold for the company, which bought the lady a new car and cup. It is this kind of marketing which adds to a products status and makes it more desirable. And causes a lot of problems for the environment. According to a story in the New York Times, producing one stainless steel water bottle was far more environmentally damaging than producing a plastic bottle. I recognise Im being more judgemental than usual, and while I am loathe to shame people for their choices, Im bothered by what these cups are selling  health as a status symbol. As Vox pointed out, people leave comments saying they are hydrated because of such cups. This idea extends to other wellness products: if you buy these clothes or these classes, you will unlock a better, healthier version of yourself, writes Vox. Health and hydration, like skin care, supplements, yoga pants etc, are part of a self-care trend that only fuels fast capitalism. Our elders were not immune to material acquisition, but there was value attached to things and a sensibility too. Clothes were upcycled, passed onto younger children, handed down as heirlooms even.  Today, it is easy to buy goods from the comfort of your phone, but it is not quenching our desire to want more. This desire is not helping our well-being, because retail therapy, as Time wrote last month, is tanking your mental health. How do we return to a time of stretching the shelf life of things, reusing, recycling, taming the beast in us that wants more irrespective of whether we need it? Simply by buying less, we will see a reduction in emissions and pollution. This is the goal we need to practise and teach our children as their future is at stake.  The writer is an instructor of journalism.  X: LedeingLady Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : A moral victory
Description : AS the UN General Assembly overwhelmingly voted on Friday in favour of granting Palestine greater rights at the multilateral body, and eventually paving the way for Palestines admission to the UN, thousands of miles away, in the killing fields of Gaza, the people of Palestine continued to face the brutality of the Israeli war machine. Only nine states voted against granting Palestine greater rights, amongst them the US. Americas ambassador to the UN said the vote against the resolution should not reflect its opposition to Palestinian statehood. This is doublespeak at its finest. Israels other staunch Western allies Germany and the UK abstained, while France voted in favour of the resolution along with 142 other members of the UN. The message from the global majority is clear: Palestine must join the comity of nations and take its rightful place at the UN. However, the Security Councils recommendation is essential for full UN membership. Here, the US can be expected to torpedo the move, as it has in the past. However, while Palestine may have scored a moral victory in the hallowed halls of the UN, in the hellscape that Gaza has been turned into, its people have no protection from Israels campaign of genocidal violence. Despite global calls for Tel Aviv to refrain from attacking Rafah, Israel has refused to listen, and hostilities continue in Gazas southernmost area. Even a feeble warning from the US to cut off weapons bound for Tel Aviv has failed to dampen Israels lust for Palestinian blood. Despatches from those in Gaza are heart-breaking. A Unicef official reports witnessing a mass exodus, with people  exhausted, terrified. He particularly points to the challenges faced by pregnant women and children, many of whom have lost limbs and suffered horrific burns. Moreover, famine has spread in Gaza, while Israel has blocked all aid for the last few days. In fact, along with Tel Avivs military machine, many civilians in the Zionist state have displayed blood-curdling cruelty towards the Palestinians, with protesters blocking aid shipments to Gaza. Many Israelis, as a society, want to treat Palestinians as untermensch, not worthy of human dignity, just as their forefathers were treated by Nazi Germany. And thanks to Israels powerful foreign patrons, they are succeeding, as Gazas hungry, bloodied and terrorised people cry out for an end to the nightmare. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Hope after defeat
Description : ON Saturday, having fallen behind Japan in the first quarter of the Sultan Azlan Shah Cup final, Pakistan showed powers of recovery to take the lead. But Japan levelled matters and then Pakistan could not hold their nerve in the penalty shootout, losing 4-1 after the match had ended 2-2 in regulation time. Head coach Roeltant Oltmans had said on the eve of the match that it would be a good experience for his youthful side if the final went to a shootout. The hope is that these young men, who have rekindled hopes of hockeys revival in Pakistan, will learn from this and return stronger. Pakistan had reached the final of the Azlan Shah Cup for the first time in 13 years after being unbeaten in the round-robin stage. On their way, Pakistan held New Zealand to a draw. Overall, the teams performance can be a starting point to build upon. Ahead of the final, Oltmans had spoken about the potential of this current lot, whilst also slamming critics in a pointed message to the countrys former Olympians, who have been resentful of a foreign coach being at the helm of the national team. The Dutchman has shown he deserves a longer, more consistent run, instead of being called up tournament after tournament. For that, matters pertaining to the running of the Pakistan Hockey Federation must be settled. The PHF had split into two factions ahead of the Azlan Shah Cup. The governments intervention resolved the dispute at least until the end of the tournament but a final decision is yet to be reached. Pakistan have failed to qualify for the last three Olympics and that woeful run will continue if matters are not resolved. Oltmans and his charges have provided hope, and with the better running of PHF, there is an opportunity for Pakistan to return to its former standing in world hockey. It should not be missed. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : The lethal troika
Description : MANY factors were responsible for the defeat of the erstwhile Soviet Union and then the US in Afghanistan. A common factor was the existence of a combination of extremely resilient militant groups resisting both superpowers. This combination consisted of three categories of militants: local Afghan militants resisting foreign invaders; Pakistani militants crossing over to help their Afghan brethren; and thousands of mujahideen from various countries, particularly in the Middle East, participating in the Afghan jihad. With some variations in their composition, role and external supporters, they fought together against the US and USSR for 30 years, forcing them to withdraw. Alarmingly, after the US withdrawal from Afghanistan in 2021, this Afghanistan-based lethal troika now targets Pakistan. The situation necessitates a fundamental shift in the terrorist threat assessment in Pakistan  from focusing exclusively on the Tehreek-i-Taliban Pakistan to broadening the threat calculus to the troika of the TTP, Afghan Taliban, and Al Qaeda. Concerning the nexus between the Taliban and TTP, the latest UN report on Afghanistan states that the Afghan government was supplying weapons, training facilities and regular financial packages to the TTP. Al Qaedas primary goal, after lying low in the region for many years, is to revive itself without annoying its Afghan hosts or attracting the Wests adverse attention. In view of this, it seems to have opted to carry out its activities in Pakistan through the TTP, while staying below the international radar. The importance Al Qaeda gives to the TTP is evident in that it selected 15 of its commanders to assist the group conduct terrorist attacks in Pakistan. It also supplied armed fighters to the TTP in its attack in Chitral in September 2023, which killed four security officials. Al Qaedas camp in Kunar, headed by Hakim ul Masri, is responsible for training suicide bombers for the TTP. The TTP, which has been the most lethal terrorist group in Pakistan over the last three years, is on the same page with the Taliban and Al Qaeda not only because of an ideological affinity and a shared history of fighting foreign invaders in Afghanistan, but also due to similar goals of Sharia enforcement in Pakistan. The TTP intends to replicate in Pakistan what the Taliban did in Afghanistan. There were reports of the TTP helping the other two members of the troika by killing Taliban members defecting to the rival Islamic State-Khorasan Province in Afghanistan. The basic point is that while the troika is united on targeting Pakistan, the members play different roles. The Taliban are likely to help TTP discreetly in Afghanistan by providing sanctuary, with Al Qaeda supporting both openly in Afghanistan through mentoring and in Pakistan through its sympathisers. With its edge, the TTP is likely to carry out ground attacks in Pakistan and lead a campaign to build up its narrative of violent extremism. As far as the strategy and tactics to be adopted by the troika go, the TTP intends to replicate in Pakistan what the Taliban did in Afghanistan. In a recent interview to Khorasan Diary, TTP ameer Noor Wali Mehsud stated, our jihad in Pakistan  has entered a decisive phase. He went on to say ominously: Pakistani security agencies have unjustly occupied our homeland and our goal is to liberate our homeland and implement the divine law. In a nutshell, the TTP seems to be falling back on the two-point narrative of resistance in Afghanistan, ie, liberation of homeland and enforcement of divine laws. This brings us to the likely impact of the troika on the terrorist threat landscape in Pakistan. Since 2021, the number of terrorist attacks in Pakistan has been consistently increasing every year. This is likely to continue in 2024, with three possible changes. One, the number of Afghan nationals taking part in terrorist attacks in Pakistan may increase  we recall here the suicide bombing against military personnel in 2023 in Bannu by Afghans. Two, given its penchant for high-profile attacks, Al Qaeda may train the TTP to carry out such attacks. Three, given that the top Al Qaeda and Taliban instructors will train TTP members, the quality and sophistication of the attacks in 2024 are likely to be enhanced. Another area likely to be impacted by the troika is infiltration. Earlier, in the 1990s, Al Qaeda infiltrated educational institutions such as Karachi and Punjab universities to recruit educated youth. These recruitment cells in universities may be reactivated. Also, to stay abreast of latest government planning in counterterrorism, the TTP, like the Taliban did in Afghanistan, may attempt to infiltrate government departments, including intel agencies. The third and most important dimension of infiltration is that of the military, which was carried out by Al Qaeda in Pakistan in the late 1990s. It may be pertinent to mention that the last attempted terrorist attack by Al Qaeda was in 2014 in Karachi, when a group of naval officers tried to hijack a navy frigate and crash into a US ship in the open seas. Al Qaeda worked somewhat openly in Pakistan from the 1980s to 2001, and built up an elaborate network of civilian volunteers in many cities of Pakistan, who assisted in collecting funds, recruiting volunteers, and providing hideouts for the group. These sleeper cells might again be contacted by it and reactivated. Similarly, there were some Pakistani militant organisations of the 1980s, like the Harkatul Mujahideen, Lashkar-e-Taiba, etc, sympathetic to Al Qaeda and lying low these days. Al Qaeda may re-establish contact with them and get their support for the TTP. Finally, both the Taliban and Al Qaeda are known for their high-quality propaganda campaign. The TTP media wing lacks that finesse. In the light of guidance from the Taliban and Al Qaeda, we are likely to witness a significant improvement in the quality of propaganda. As Sun Tsu stated, if you know your enemy and you know yourself, you need not fear the result of a hundred battles. Sadly, it seems that Pakistan is erring in assessing the collective capabilities of the TTP, supported by the Taliban and Al Qaeda. The writer is a former police officer who was Nactas first national coordinator. Published in Dawn, May 11th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : An inclusive judiciary
Description : ACCORDING to media reports, a recent meeting of the Judicial Commission of Pakistan (JCP) was adjourned without finalising changes in its rules. This was because the law minister informed the members that the federal government was considering amending the Constitution to revise the appointment process of high court and Supreme Court (SC) judges. The government has thus far not revealed details of its proposed amendments. Some indication of possible reform can be found in the PML-Ns manifesto, which provides for an inclusive procedure for appointment of Superior Court Judges on merit. The PPPs manifesto recognises the importance of diversity, and promises to increase representation for women, minorities, and underrepresented segments of society in the judiciary. The PTIs manifesto makes similar commitments regarding making the judiciary more inclusive and the process of appointments more transparent. Importantly, the committee constituted in December 2023 to review the Judicial Commission Rules, 2010, also listed diversity as one of the key areas that required consideration. The major parties and courts agree there is need for reform in the appointments process. It appears, therefore, that the major political parties and the courts agree there is need for reform in the appointments process to make it more inclusive and the judiciary more diverse. Specifically, a number of reforms will be required to achieve this objective. The first issue that needs to be addressed is that of framing. Often, inclusion and diversity are considered contrary to the idea of merit, and are reduced merely to tokenism and tick-box exercises. This perception must be strongly challenged. The inclusion of women as well as other marginalised groups in the administration of justice is a cross-cutting issue, with implications for the credibility and legitimacy of the justice system in larger society. It should be seen as an objective in itself as well as an essential pre-condition for the effective protection of human rights and substantive equality. It is now recognised that diversity is not an optional extra but a basic component of the judiciarys ability to do its job. And that diversity and inclusion should be considered a part of merit and not in opposition to it. This is why a number of constitutions recognise the importance of diversity in the judiciary  specifically, greater inclusion of women  but also consideration for religious, racial and other factors, depending on the context. Any amendments to the process of judicial appointments, therefore, should expressly provide for the equal representation of women, inclusion and diversity as objectives of the judicial appointments process. Second, the composition of the JCP needs amendment. Currently, it comprises the chief justice of Pakistan, four most senior judges of the SC, one former judge of the SC, the federal law and justice minister, the attorney general of Pakistan, and a senior SC advocate. When the JCP is considering appointments for the high courts, it includes four additional members. At present, all members of the JCP are men. This is not accidental, but a consequence of the larger exclusion of women from the top echelons of the legal profession in the country. Its composition also suffers from lack of diversity and inclusion of members who are not from the judiciary or the bar. This absence has an adverse impact on the JCPs credibility and is not sustainable. Article 175A of the Constitution should, therefore, be amended to make the JCP more diverse, and also aim to ensure that its composition broadly reflects that of larger society in terms of gender, ethnicity, religious groups, and regional balance. Third, there is currently an absence of any criteria for appointments to the SC and high courts. The Constitution only stipulates the requirement of age, citizenship, and minimum professional experience. The Judicial Commission Rules are also completely silent on the criteria on which the JCP nominates or assesses candidates. The lack of transparent and public criteria on which judicial appointments are made is incompatible with international standards and best practices on judicial appointments. Changes in the judicial appointments process should, therefore, include criteria on which candidates are considered for recommendation, and give due consideration to the need for the progressive attainment of gender equity and the removal of other historic factors of discrimination and marginalisation. The fourth issue that also has an impact on inclusion and diversity is how nominations are initiated. At present, chief justices have the sole power of initiation; ie, it is only the chief justice of the relevant court who can recommend names of candidates, who are then considered by the JCP for nominations to the parliamentary committee. This power has dubious roots, creates an unnecessary hierarchy within the JCP, and has led to the perception of misuse. In a number of jurisdictions, including the UK and South Africa, the bodies empowered to make judicial appointments invite interested candidates to apply to be considered for appointment to the Supreme Court. This model opens up the judicial appointments process, allows a more diverse range of eligible candidates to apply, and eliminates any bias, real or perceived, in the initiation stage. The government should, therefore, consider making provision for the JCP inviting applications for vacancies in the high courts and SC. The fifth area that needs reform is lack of transparency. At present, the deliberations and proceedings of the JCP are secret and opaque. The public has no information about why certain candidates are chosen for consideration and on what basis candidates are selected for nomination. In the larger context of discriminatory practices and attitudes against women and other marginalised groups, such secrecy often works to their detriment and leads to the perception of bias in the appointments process. While the detailed deliberations of the JCP need not be made public, the reasons for selecting certain candidates for nomination must be disclosed. Most importantly, perhaps, the governments reform package must take into consideration input from a broad range of stakeholders. Opaque and hasty attempts at such far-reaching legislation that are not consultative would defeat the very objectives of transparency, merit, and inclusion such reform claims to achieve. The writer is a legal adviser for the International Commission of Jurists. reema.omer@icj.org X: reema_omer Published in Dawn, May 11th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Areas of cooperation with Saudi Arabia identified: PM Shehbaz
Description : PRIME Minister Shehbaz Sharif has termed Pakistans recent diplomatic deliberations with Saudi Arabia great progress, Geo News reported. In an interview with Arab news channel Al Arabiya English, the premier said, We have identified areas of mutual cooperation, both at the government-to-government and business-to-business levels and that have been clearly identified. We now have a clear-cut way forward. The PM highlighted that both countries would work on mutual cooperation and investments in the field of mines and minerals as well as renewable energy, among other fields. The interview comes days after a Saudi investors delegation visited Pakistan.
The premier spoke about his maiden visit to the kingdom after starting his new term as the countrys chief executive. He also mentioned the visits made by the Saudi government and business delegations to strengthen diplomatic and trade ties between the two nations. PM Shehbaz said his meetings with Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed Bin Salman were positive. In response to a question, the premier termed the recent Pak-Saudi investment conference very productive and fruitful. While sharing details of his vision for economic stability, the PM mentioned his recent visit to the kingdom to attend the World Economic Forum meetings in which the discussions revolved around increasing agricultural production in Pakistan with the help of modern equipment and technology. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Lender endorses status quo in SBPs policy rate
Description : KARACHI: The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has endorsed the State Bank of Pakistans (SBP) decision to keep the interest rate unchanged despite a sharp deceleration in inflation. The IMF-Pakistan SBA (2nd and Final Review) Country Report made it clear that the Fund was willing to see no change in the interest rate despite demand from the stakeholders in the wake of falling inflation, which has widened the gap between the 22 per cent interest rate and expected 13 to 15pc estimated CPI in May. The IMF staff endorsed the SBPs Monetary Policy Committee decision to maintain the policy rate, said the report. It is believed that the unprecedented interest rate has crippled economic growth, which is estimated to expand at 2pc in FY24 after contracting in FY23.  Most analysts and research houses believe that inflation in May is likely to be between 13 and 15pc, providing enough room to bring down the interest rate. However, the IMFs endorsement of SBPs decision to maintain a status quo indicates that it may be kept steady despite an expected gap of about 7 to 9pc between inflation and the policy rate.  The IMF report further said that any relaxation of the policy stance should be justified by evidence of declining inflation, controlled pass-through effects, and limited exchange rate pressures from forex market normalisation. The authorities remain committed to a flexible exchange rate and transparent interbank FX market, said the report. The IMF recommended the continued proactive accumulation of reserves through interbank purchases, noting positively that the reduction of the SBPs swap/forward position has alleviated forward premia compression, said the report. The IMF also cautioned that the recent stability of the rupee should not lead to expectations of its persistence in the future. Reforms for the sustainability of the power sector require solid cost-side reforms. The authorities need to speed up work on improving transmission and distribution infrastructure, Discos performance via privatisation or long-term management concession, moving captive demand to the national grid, revisiting terms of PPA where feasible, and converting Power Holding Private Ltd debt into cheaper public debt. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Exports to Europe fall despite GSP+
Description : ISLAMABAD: Pakistans exports to European countries declined 6.27 per cent in the first nine months of the current fiscal year. Exports to the European Union states have begun to dip in the current fiscal year despite a GSP+ status that allows most Pakistani goods a duty-free entrance into European markets. In October 2023, the European Parliament unanimously voted to extend the GSP+ status for another four years until 2027 for developing countries, including Pakistan, to enjoy duty-free or minimum duty on exports to Europe. In absolute terms, Pakistans exports to the EU dipped to $6.105bn in 9MFY24 from $6.27bn in the corresponding months of last year. According to figures compiled by the State Bank of Pakistan, the decline was mainly due to reduced demand for Pakistani goods in western, southern, and northern Europe. In FY23, exports to the EU dropped 4.41pc to $8.188bn from $8.566bn in the preceding fiscal year. Western Europe, which includes countries such as Germany, the Netherlands, France, Italy and Belgium, accounts for the largest portion of Pakistans exports to the EU. However, exports to this region have significantly decreased by 12pc. The export value stood at $2.947bn in the first nine months of FY24, down from $3.353bn during the same period last year. While exports to western, southern, and northern Europe have declined, there is a silver lining in the form of an uptick in exports to Eastern Europe. The exports saw an increase of 8.38pc to $466.19m in 9MFY24, up from $430.14m in the corresponding months last year. Exports to southern Europe declined 1.24pc to $2.216bn in 9MFY24 from $2.244bn in the corresponding period last year. In this region, exports to Spain grew 3.73pc to $1.084 in 9MFY24 from $1.045bn last year. Exports to Italy declined 3.22pc to $825.44m in 9MFY24, compared to $852.93 m in the same period last year. However, exports to northern Europe witnessed a 2.31pc dip. The export value to this region stood at $475.92m, down from $487.19m in the corresponding period last year. Before Brexit, Pakistans major export destination was the United Kingdom. In the post-Brexit period, Pakistans exports to the UK slightly went up to $1.529bn in 9MFY24 from $1.494bn over the corresponding period of last year, indicating an increase of 2.34pc. In FY23, Pakistans exports dipped by 10.63pc to $1.966bn to the UK from $2.20bn in the same period of the preceding year. The British government, however, has assured Islamabad that there will be no change in the post-Brexit scenario, as evident from Pakistans inclusion in its preferential market access scheme. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : UAE hits out at Netanyahu for saying it may help run Gaza
Description : CAIRO: The United Arab Emirates hit out at Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu on Saturday after the Israeli leader said the Gulf state could be involved in aiding a future government in Gaza after the war. The prominent and influential Gulf state is one of few Arab states with official diplomatic ties to Israel, which it has maintained through Israels more than six-month war in Gaza, although relations appear to have become frayed. Foreign Minister Sheikh Abdullah bin Zayed Al Nahyan rebuked Netanyahu in an early morning post on X, saying Abu Dhabi denounced the Israeli leaders comments.
The UAE stresses that the Israeli prime minister does not have any legal capacity to take this step, and the UAE refuses to be drawn into any plan aimed at providing cover for the Israeli presence in the Gaza Strip, he said in an Arabic post. Sheikh Abdullah said the UAE would be prepared to support a Palestinian government that met the hopes and aspirations of the Palestinian people, which he said included independence. In an interview, Netanyahu said the UAE, Saudi Arabia and other countries could possibly assist a civilian government with Gazans in the enclave after the war. Sources said that Abu Dhabis relationship with Netanyahu has fractured over the military campaign, with Emirati officials now rarely speaking with him. Published in Dawn, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : ESSAY: WERE READY FOR YOUR CLOSE-UP NOW
Description : JUNE 13, 2014 I am excited to be here, thrilled to have the opportunity to audition. Despite being on the verge of throwing up, I walk into the audition room assertively. The male and female casting directors size me up. They study the way I carry myself. They ascertain my charisma, assess my brand potential and evaluate my attractiveness. I am conscious of all of it and yet, I allow them to continue doing it.  I am a willing participant in this game, voluntarily choosing to subject myself to constant rejections. Perhaps all artists have masochistic tendencies and perhaps these are mine. The casting directors thank me for coming in and I thank them for their time. I notice that I am trembling as I grab my bag from the floor. Before I have even stepped out of the room, the whisperings have begun.    As I stumble out into the waiting room, the other actresses peer closely at me, attempting to decipher whether I blew it or bagged the role. I remain stoic and they hastily return to rehearsing their monologues. We are all clones of one another. We hold out hope, waiting for that singular break, which will catapult our lives into a growing trajectory. Diary entries from a former actor reflect on how the desire to conform to the norms of the entertainment industry allowed her to lose her own sense of self and how words helped her rediscover it  The room reeks of desperation and throbs with want. I walk out.    Upon returning home, I tactfully avoid my mother, who will undoubtedly want to know how the audition went. I loiter aimlessly in the kitchen, before finally grabbing a glass of water and heading to my bedroom.  I feel restless and out of control. I need to reaffirm my beauty. I pick up my phone and select a desirable photo of myself from my camera roll. In it, Im half-smiling, caught in the golden hour.  I post it to my Instagram and, within a couple of hours, 192 people like it. The comments roll in slowly: stunning!!, OMG, so beautiful. Im moderately satisfied.  I move over to my Instagram mailbox and scroll through a handful of DMs from random men. This, in a way, also reaffirms my beauty. Im living in the male gaze and I no longer mind it. Ive done good. JULY 15, 2015 Across my teenage years, I work sporadically as an actress in Karachi. I scour Facebook pages of production houses and advertising agencies and bookmark audition callouts. I, then, eagerly drive to audition at rented bungalows in Defence and Sea View.  I carefully curate bits of work in commercials, short films and plays  the only mediums where I am provided a larger margin to experiment as a female performer in Pakistan. I am cast as the feminist, middle-aged woman whose husband is cheating on her in a contemporary play or as the galvanising, empowered 20-something Pakistani woman in a commercial. I stare into cameras, grim and unsmiling. I find comfortable homes on stage and sets. I revel in the camaraderie of grown-up adults playing make-believe. I dont mind the long hours or the protracted time it takes for the shots to be lit up  this is all worth the wait. The stage, for me, has become a safe space to be vulnerable, without judgement. In a way, it is a refuge from the hardening of the soul that comes with growing up as a woman in this world. Though I am pleased with my work, a part of me remains discontent. There is a scarcity of roles in Pakistan. Playing the traumatised daughter-in-law or the scorned woman are unappealing options. In auditions, I am still patronised by casting directors, who tell me to be less angry. Yet, I play along. I be what they need. I wear make-up, albeit horrendously. I try to appear striking.  And then, I am mortified when I am not given a callback. My parents are nonplussed. They cannot fathom why their academically gifted daughter prefers a profession where she is commodified and where her youth is a currency. They cannot understand why I have promised loyalty to a media machine that still operates on patriarchal benchmarks of beauty. Unsurprisingly, by my early adulthood, I fail to carve out my own identity. I forfeit my voice. I become an extension of something else and nothing more. FEBRUARY 25, 2017 There are specific moments on set when I am hyper-aware of my gender. I spend hours suspended from reality, with a cast and crew who are strangers I am introduced to just a few hours earlier.  We all attempt to foster greater intimacy for a worthier creative breakthrough  this is within the acting job description, after all. But there are times when this faux closeness is exploited by those with far greater clout than me and, in those moments, the onus of protecting myself falls on me alone. So, I grudgingly laugh along to misogynistic jokes. I do my best not to appear over-friendly. I refuse to prolong conversations beyond work on WhatsApp with casting agents. And after shows, I head straight home, avoiding the spaces where things get murky. Because, who will believe me?  Historically in Pakistan, women simply become a centre of speculation upon whom moral investigations are conducted. Society and viewers will ultimately turn the blame on me  I chose to be a pawn in this industry. I, a Pakistani-Muslim woman, have entered this vulgarity out of my own volition. I do what other women do. I silence myself. I relive traumas. There is no Human Resource team, there are no harassment policies read out on the first day of production, and there is no power I hold. Everything simply goes.  AUGUST 12, 2018 Its August and Im cast in a commercial, which releases on Pakistans Independence Day. Ironically, the theme of this commercial is women empowerment. Ironic because, as I sit in my makeup chair, artists arrive to accentuate my features, cover up my blemishes and contour my nose. Intermittently, they drop in beauty tips on how to tame my hair and encourage me to acquire better make-up. I nod politely, as if Ill actually consider their advice, but all I feel internally is dejected. For years, I had assumed that my mind, my imagination and my education were worthy devices. But in actuality, I had greatly underestimated how much of the world ran on beauty. I slump forward in my chair and think about how I have given so much of myself to a profession where I am a throwaway, simply replaceable by the next pretty young thing who walks through those doors. SEPTEMBER 20, 2018 Ive decided to take a break from acting. Its been five years of endless auditions and unremitting rejections. Of course, discounting the notion that my self-esteem has plummeted to irredeemable depths, the decision also makes sense  Im leaving Pakistan for the first time, to complete my undergraduate degree abroad. In England, I periodically dabble in theatre to satisfy my acting itch. I perform in consequential plays like The Vagina Monologues. I deliver dramatic readings of passages from exiled authors in dimly lit studios. But even here, as a brown-Muslim woman, the roles I am given are scant. The leads are reserved for white people, whilst other ethnicities are relegated to the supporting roles. Here, I face other hitches  I am seen as either too dark or not dark enough. I am either a religious creature or an outlandish woman from an exotic land. I am still seen from a white persons perspective. MARCH 27, 2020 The world has stopped turning on its wheels. A global pandemic rages across the globe and humanity has been ordered to stay home. I scramble to return to Pakistan and spend the next few weeks doing what everyone else is doing  baking, scrolling through social media and bingeing on television shows.  But, after a while, the days mesh into one and I am forced to sit with myself for the first time in my life. I reflect and ponder over the last couple of years, which led to me becoming the woman I am today. One restless night, I pick up my laptop in search of an avenue for creative expression. I open up a blank MS Word document and begin to write. And after 22 years of silencing my voice, the words gush out of me, like a broken faucet which wont turn off. These words had seemingly lived within me, waiting with bated breath, soundlessly patient. So, I write. I write about the experiences I never had. I write stories in which I garbage social norms and where women are flawed individuals. I write stories about the spaces I wish to inhabit. I write about the women who inhabit my real life  women who fire after their yearnings without the fear of retribution. Slowly, I begin sending out my tales into the world, hoping my lived experiences may relate to someone. I face the familiar call of rejection but, ultimately, the year of the pandemic becomes the year of writing.  Through those long months of staying at home, I use my words to reckon with the trauma of my past and the horrifying moments I allowed myself to go through. With reclaiming my narrative, I feel cathartic. By writing about the pain, I have not let it best me. I am finally the protagonist of my own story. As I write, I relearn everything I have been taught. I purge all the venomous psychology, instilled in me as a young girl. I begin to closely understand my womanhood. In my essays and stories, my beauty and physicality are no longer determining factors in my worthiness. My mind is my weapon and, unlike my beauty, it doesnt have an expiration date. OCTOBER 30, 2021 My heart feels irritated. Today, I have nothing to write on my computer. My fingers flick over to the old, bookmarked link of my acting portfolio. As the website loads, my heart starts pounding.  The pictures appear one at a time. I scroll down and see old headshots and performance screen grabs. I am 17, 19, and 20. I am smiling, poised, concealing the hurt. I am being what they need me to be  their thoughts, opinions and desires. I inhale shortly and close my laptop. I am remorseful that I couldnt protect that little girl. That girl who fell in love with the stage. The girl who learnt how to finesse technique, to hit the mark consistently, to access unknowing depths within her. But writing about that girl and restructuring her narrative, I have a greater agency over my past and present. I have allowed myself to gain autonomy through creative expression. These words have saved my life. Neha Maqsood is a writer and poet.
Her work can be read at nehamaqsood.com Published in Dawn, EOS, May 12th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
Title : Mailbox
Description :   The blessed iftar This is with reference to the article The blessed iftar experience by Shahmeer Asif (YW, March 23rd). The article highlighted the true meaning of togetherness. It showed how during iftar, people come together, feeling love and kindness, regardless of their caste or status.  This simple mealtime is important both religiously and in terms of human connection. It brings people from different cultures and classes closer, creating strong bonds and cherished memories among family members.  Musadique Ali,
Larkana  Water, natures most precious gift This is regarding the article Water, natures most precious gift by Ramsha Mujib (YW, June 23). The article emphasised the significance of World Water Day in raising awareness about water issues and promoting effective management of water resources.  It also sheds light on the causes and consequences of water scarcity, stressing the urgent need for action at various levels to address these challenges. Aman Memon,
Sukkur Moonlit memories  This is regarding the story Moonlit memories, by Aliza Hina (YW, March 16). The story was a great reminder to all those who often forget to appreciate what they have in the present while dwelling in the past.  The story served as a good reminder to live in the present and appreciate what we have now, rather than longing for things from the past.   Nida Mumtaz,
Karachi Rabia keeps a fast  This is regarding the article Rabia keeps a fast, by Muhammad Arham Usman (YW, March 30).  The story depicted a real-life scenario that often occurs to both new and experienced individuals who are fasting. Oftentimes, one forgets that they are fasting and unintentionally eat or drink something. However, as the story conveyed, the fast is not broken but remains intact, if done mistakenly. Moreover, I agree with the writers view that fasting teaches us self-control and reinforces ones faith and piety.  Mehtab Ali Lakhan,
Ghotki  II The story Rabia keeps a fast by Muhammad Arham Usman highlighted that if we accidentally break our fast, theres no need to cry. Instead, one must ask for forgiveness from God because the fast is still valid. Fasting is for Allah; He knows our intentions. Allah is very merciful; He knows what is in our heart and can see how regretful we are.    Mirza Atta,
Turbat Published in Dawn, Young World, May 11th, 2024 Dear visitor, the comments section is undergoing an overhaul and will return soon.  Compunode.com Pvt. Ltd. (www.compunode.com).Designed for Dawn. Copyright  2024, Dawn NewsKit Publishing Platform
